<h2>I.  The Night Entrance</h2>
<p>
 About the shop of my friend Anderson the
 <a href="Notes/n37421.html" target="bottom">apothecary</a>
 there always existed a peculiar fascination, which early marked it out as my
 favorite lounging-place.  In the very atmosphere of the establishment, loaded
 as it was with a composite smell of all things curative and preventive, there
 was an aromatic invitation to scientific musing, which could not have met
 with a readier acceptance had it spoken in the breath of frankincense.
 The very
 <a href="Notes/n91862.html" target="bottom">gallipots</a>
 grew gradually to possess a charm for me as they sat calmly ranged upon their
 oaken shelves, looking like a convention of unostentatious philanthropists,
 whose silent bosoms teemed with every variety of renovation for the human
 race.  A little sanctum at the inner end of the shop, walled off with red
 curtains from the profane gaze of the
 <a href="Notes/n81695.html" target="bottom">unsanative</a>,
 contained two chairs for
 the doctor and myself, and a library where all the masters of physic were
 grouped, through
 <a href="Notes/n52687.html" target="bottom">their sheep and paper
 representatives</a>, in more friendliness of contact than has ever been known
 to characterize a consultation of like spirits under any other
 circumstances.  Within the limits of
 <a href="Notes/n27165.html" target="bottom">four square feet</a>,
 <a href="Notes/n57984.html" target="bottom">Pereira and Christison</a>
 condensed all their stores of wisdom and
 research, and
 <a href="Introduction/foot55002.html" target="bottom">Dunglison</a> and
 Brathwaite
 sat cheek by jowl beside them.  There stood the
 <a href="Introduction/foot17767.html" target="bottom">Dispensatory</a>,
 with the air of a business-like office,
 <a name="quote20342" />wherein all the specifics of the
 <span lang="la">materia medica</span>
 had been brought together for a scientific 
 <a href="Notes/n75124.html" target="bottom">conversazione</a>,
 but, becoming enamored of each other’s society, had resolved to stay,
 overcrowded though they might be, and make an indefinite sitting of it.  In a
 modest niche, set apart like a vestibule from the apartments of the medical
 gentlemen, lay a shallow case, which disclosed, on the lifting of a cover,
 the neatly-ordered rank of tweezers, probe, and lancet, which constituted my
 friend’s claim to the confidence of the
 <a href="Notes/n61739.html" target="bottom">plethoric</a>
 community; for although unblessed with metropolitan fame, he was still no
</p><blockquote>
 <a href="Notes/n70550.html" target="bottom">“Cromwell guiltless of his
 country’s blood.”</a>
</blockquote><p>
 Here many an hour have I sat buried in the statistics of human life or the
 history of the make-shifts for its preservation.  Here the details of
 surgical or medical experiment have held me in as complete engrossment as the
 positions and crises of romance; and here especially,
 <a name="quote57828" />with a disregard to my own safety which would have
 done credit to
 <a href="Notes/n07010.html" target="bottom">Quintus Curtius</a>,
 have I made upon myself the trial of the effects of every strange drug and
 chemical which the laboratory could produce.  Now with the chloroform bottle 
 beneath my nose have I set myself careering upon the wings of a thrilling and
 accelerating life, until I had just enough power remaining to restore the
 liquid to its place upon the shelf, and sink back into the enjoyment of the 
 delicious apathy which lasted through the few succeeding moments.  Now ether
 was substituted for chloroform, and the difference of their phenomena noted,
 and now some other exhilarant, in the form of an opiate or stimulant, was the 
 instrument of my experiments, until I had run through the whole gamut of
 queer agents within my reach.
<p>
 In all these experiences research and not indulgence was my object, so that I
 never became the victim of any habit in the prosecution of my headlong
 investigations.  When the circuit of all the accessible tests was completed,
 I ceased experimenting, and sat down like a pharmaceutical
 <a href="Notes/n59055.html" target="bottom">Alexander, with no more
 drug-worlds to conquer</a>.
</p><p>
 One morning, in the spring of
 <a href="Notes/n41505.html" target="bottom">185—</a>,
 I dropped in upon the doctor for my accustomed lounge.  
</p><p>
 “Have you seen,” said he, “my new acquisitions?”
</p><p>
 I looked toward the shelves in the direction of which he pointed, and saw,
 added since my last visit, a row of comely pasteboard cylinders inclosing
 vials of the various extracts prepared by Tilden &amp; Co.
 Arranged in order according to their size, they confronted me, as pretty a
 little rank of medicinal sharp-shooters as could gratify the eye of an
 amateur.  I approached the shelves, that I might take them in review.  
</p><p>
 A rapid glance showed most of them to be old acquaintances.
 “<a href="Notes/n50569.html" target="bottom">Conium</a>,
 <a href="Notes/n35718.html" target="bottom">taraxacum</a>,
 rhubarb — ha! what is this?  Cannabis Indica?”  “That,” answered the doctor,
 looking with a parental fondness upon his new treasure, “is a preparation of
 the East Indian hemp, a powerful agent in cases of lock-jaw.”  On the
 strength of this introduction, I took down the little
 <a href="Notes/n04967.html" target="bottom">archer</a>,
 and, removing his outer verdant coat, began the further prosecution of his
 acquaintance.  To pull out a broad and shallow cork was the work of an
 instant, and it revealed to me an olive-brown extract, of the consistency of
 pitch, and a decided aromatic odor.  Drawing out a small portion upon the
 point of my penknife, I was just going to put it to my tongue, when “Hold
 on!” cried the doctor; “do you want to kill yourself?  That stuff is deadly
 poison.”  “Indeed!” I replied; “no, I can not say that I have any settled
 determination of that kind;” and with that I replaced the cork, and restored
 the extract, with all its appurtenances, to the shelf.  
</p><p>
 The remainder of my morning’s visit in the sanctum was spent in consulting
 <a href="Notes/n99999.html" target="bottom">the Dispensatory under the title
 “Cannabis Indica.”</a>  <a name="quote64821" />The sum of my discoveries there
 may be found, with much additional information, in that invaluable popular
 work, <a href="Notes/n99998.html" target="bottom">Johnston’s Chemistry of
 Common Life</a>.  This being universally accessible, I will allude no further
 to the result of that morning’s researches than to mention the three
 following conclusions to which I came.  
</p><p>
 First, the doctor was both right and wrong; right, inasmuch as a sufficiently
 large dose of the drug, if it could be retained in the stomach, would produce
 death, like any other narcotic, and the ultimate effect of its habitual use
 had always proved highly injurious to mind and body; wrong, since moderate
 doses of it were never immediately deadly, and many millions of people daily
 employed it as an indulgence similarly to opium.  Second, it was the hasheesh 
 referred to by Eastern travelers, and the subject of a most graphic chapter
 from the pen of
 <a href="Introduction/foot34038.html" target="bottom">Bayard Taylor</a>,
 which months before had moved me powerfully to curiosity and admiration.
 Third, I would add it to the list of my former experiments.  
</p><p>
 In pursuance of this last determination, I waited till my friend was out of
 sight, that I might not terrify him by that which he considered a suicidal
 venture, and then quietly uncapping my little archer a second time, removed
 from his store of offensive armor a pill sufficient to balance the
 <a href="Notes/n83351.html" target="bottom">ten grain weight</a>
 of the
 <a href="Notes/n22850.html" target="bottom">sanctorial</a>
 scales.  This, upon the authority of Pereira and the
 <a href="Introduction/foot17767.html" target="bottom">Dispensatory</a>,
 I swallowed without a tremor as to the danger of the result.  
</p><p>
 Making all due allowance for the fact that I had not taken my hasheesh
 <a href="Notes/n27298.html" target="bottom">bolus</a>
 fasting, I ought to experience its effects with the next four hours.  That
 time elapsed without bringing the shadow of a phenomenon.  It was plain that
 my dose had been insufficient.  
</p><p>
 For the sake of observing the most conservative prudence, I suffered several
 days to go by without a repetition of the experiment, and then, keeping the
 matter equally secret, I administered to myself a pill of
 <a href="Notes/n71863.html" target="bottom">fifteen grains</a>.
 This second was equally ineffectual with the first.  
</p><p>
 Gradually, by
 <a href="Notes/n89516.html" target="bottom">five grains</a>
 at a time, I increased the dose to
 <a href="Notes/n49808.html" target="bottom">thirty grains</a>,
 which I took one evening half an hour after tea.  I had now almost come to
 the conclusion that I was absolutely unsusceptible of the hasheesh influence.
 Without any expectation that this last experiment would be more successful
 than the former ones, and indeed with no realization of the manner in which
 the drug affected those who did make the experiment successfully, I went to
 pass the evening at the house of an intimate friend.  In music and
 conversation the time passed pleasantly.  The clock struck ten, reminding me
 that three hours had elapsed since the dose was taken, and as yet not an
 unusual symptom had appeared.  I was provoked to think that this trial was as 
 fruitless as its predecessors.  
</p><p>
 Ha! what means this sudden thrill?  A shock, as of some unimagined vital
 force, shoots without warning through my entire frame, leaping to my fingers’
 ends, piercing my brain, startling me till I almost spring from my chair.  
</p><p>
 I could not doubt it.  I was in the power of the hasheesh influence.  My
 first emotion was one of uncontrollable terror — a sense of getting
 something which I had not bargained for.  That moment I would have given all
 I had or hoped to have to be as I was three hours before.  
</p><p>
 No pain any where — not a twinge in any fibre — yet a cloud of unutterable
 strangeness was settling upon me, and wrapping me impenetrably in from all
 that was natural or familiar.  Endeared faces, well known to me of old,
 surrounded me, yet they were not with me in my loneliness.  I had entered
 upon a tremendous life which they could not share.  If the disembodied ever
 return to hover over the hearth-stone which once had a seat for them, they
 look upon their friends as I then looked upon mine.  A nearness of place,
 with an infinite distance of state, a connection which had no possible
 sympathies for the wants of that hour of revelation, an isolation none the
 less perfect for seeming companionship.  
</p><p>
 Still I spoke, a question was put to me, and I answered it; I even laughed at
 a <span lang="fr">bon mot</span>.  Yet it was not my voice which spoke;
 perhaps one which I once had
 far away in another time and another place.  For a while I knew nothing that
 was going on externally, and then the remembrance of the last remark which
 had been made returned slowly and indistinctly, as some trait of a dream will
 return after many days, puzzling us to say where we have been conscious of it
 before.  
</p><p>
 A fitful wind all the evening had been sighing down the chimney; it now grew
 into the steady hum of a vast wheel in accelerating motion.  For a while this
 hum seemed to resound through all space.  I was stunned by it — I was
 absorbed in it.  Slowly the revolution of the wheel came to a stop, and its
 monotonous din was changed for the reverberating peal of a grand cathedral
 organ.  The ebb and flow of its inconceivably solemn tone filled me with a
 grief that was more than human.  I sympathized with the dirge-like cadence 
 as spirit sympathizes with spirit.  And then, in the full conviction that all
 I heard and felt was real, I looked out of my isolation to see the effect of
 the music on my friends.  Ah! we were in separate worlds indeed.  Not a trace
 of appreciation on any face.  
</p><p>
 Perhaps I was acting strangely.  Suddenly a pair of busy hands, which had
 been running neck and neck all the evening with a nimble little
 crochet-needle over a race-ground of pink and blue silk, stopped at their
 goal, and their owner looked at me steadfastly.  Ah!  I was found out — I
 had betrayed myself.  In terror I waited, expecting every instant to hear the
 word “hasheesh.”  No, the lady only asked me some question connected with the
 previous conversation.  As mechanically as an automaton I began to reply.  As
 I heard once more the alien and unreal tones of my own voice, I became
 convinced that it was some one else who spoke, and in another world.  I sat
 and listened; still the voice kept speaking.  Now for the first time I
 experienced that vast change which hasheesh makes in all measurements of
 time.  The first word of the reply occupied a period sufficient for the
 action of a drama; the last left me in complete ignorance of any point far
 enough back in the past to date the commencement of the sentence.  Its
 enunciation might have occupied years.  I was not in the same life which had
 held me when I heard it begun.  
</p><p>
 <a name="quote69104" />And now, with time, space expanded also.  At my
 friend’s house one particular arm-chair was always reserved for me.  I was
 sitting in it at a distance of hardly
 <a href="Notes/n45767.html" target="bottom">three feet</a>
 from the centre-table around which the members of the family were grouped.
 Rapidly that distance widened.  The whole atmosphere seemed ductile, and spun
 endlessly out into great spaces surrounding me on every side.  We were in a
 vast hall, of which my friends and I occupied opposite extremities.  The
 ceiling and the wall ran upward with a gliding motion, as if vivified by a
 sudden force of resistless growth.  
</p><p>
 Oh!  I could not bear it.  I should soon be left alone in the midst of an
 infinity of space.  And now more and more every moment increased the
 conviction that I was watched.  I did not know then, as I learned afterward,
 that suspicion of all earthly things and persons was the characteristic of
 the hasheesh delirium.  
</p><p>
 In the midst of my complicated hallucination, I could perceive that I had a
 dual existence.  One portion of me was whirled unresistingly along the track
 of this tremendous experience, the other sat looking down from a height upon 
 its double, observing, reasoning, and serenely weighing all the phenomena.
 This calmer being suffered with the other by sympathy, but did not lose its
 self-possession.  Presently it warned me that I must go home, lest the
 growing effect of the hasheesh should incite me to some act which might
 frighten my friends.  I acknowledged the force of this remark very much as if
 it had been made by another person, and rose to take my leave.  I advanced
 toward the centre-table.  With every step its distance increased.  I nerved
 myself for a long pedestrian journey.  Still the lights, the faces, the
 furniture receded.  At last, almost unconsciously, I reached them.  It would
 be tedious to attempt to convey the idea of the time which my leave-taking 
 consumed, and the attempt, at least with all minds that have not passed
 through the same experience, would be as impossible as tedious.  At last I
 was in the street.  
</p><p>
 Beyond me the view stretched endlessly away.  It was an unconverging vista,
 whose nearest lamps seemed separated from me by leagues.  I was doomed to
 pass through a merciless stretch of space.  A soul just disenthralled,
 setting out for his flight beyond the farthest visible star, could not be
 more overwhelmed with his newly acquired conception of the sublimity of
 distance than I was at that moment.  Solemnly I began my infinite journey.
 Before long I walked in entire unconsciousness of all around me.  I dwelt in
 a marvelous inner world.  I existed by turns in different places and various
 states of being.  Now I swept my gondola through the moonlit lagoons of
 Venice.  Now Alp on Alp towered above my view, and the glory of the coming 
 sun flashed purple light upon the topmost icy pinnacle.  Now in the primeval
 silence of some unexplored tropical forest I spread my feathery leaves, a
 giant fern, and swayed and nodded in the spice-gales over a river whose waves
 at once sent up clouds of music and perfume.  My soul changed to a vegetable
 essence, thrilled with a strange and unimagined ecstasy.  The
 palace of Al Haroun
 could not have brought me back to humanity.  
</p><p>
 I will not detail all the transmutations of that walk.  Ever and anon I
 returned from my dreams into consciousness, as some well-known house seemed
 to leap out into my path, awaking me with a shock.  The whole way homeward
 was a series of such awakings and relapses into abstraction and delirium
 until I reached the corner of the street in which I lived.  
</p><p>
 Here a new phenomenon manifested itself.  I had just awaked for perhaps the
 twentieth time, and my eyes were wide open.  I recognized all surrounding
 objects, and began calculating the distance home.  Suddenly, out of a blank
 wall at my side a muffled figure stepped into the path before me.   His hair,
 white as snow, hung in tangled elf-locks on his shoulders, where he carried
 also a heavy burden, like unto
 <a href="Notes/n63570.html" target="bottom">the well-filled sack of sins which Bunyan places on the back of his pilgrim</a>.
 Not liking his manner, I stepped aside, 
 intending to pass around him and go on my way.  This change of our relative
 positions allowed the blaze of a neighboring street-lamp to fall full on his
 face, which had hitherto been totally obscured.  Horror unspeakable! I shall
 never, till the day I die, forget that face.  Every lineament
 was stamped with the records of a life black with damning crime; it glared
 upon me with a ferocious wickedness and a stony despair which only he may
 feel who is entering on the retribution of the unpardonable sin.  He might
 have sat to a demon painter as the ideal of
 <a href="Notes/n57884.html" target="bottom">Shelly’s Cenci</a>.
 I seemed to grow blasphemous in looking at him, and, in an agony of fear,
 began to run away.  He detained me with a bony hand, which pierced my wrist
 like talons, and, slowly taking down the burden from his own shoulders, laid
 it upon mine.  I threw it off and pushed him away.  Silently he returned and 
 restored the weight.  Again I repulsed him, this time crying out, “Man, what
 do you mean?”  In a voice which impressed me with the sense of wickedness as
 his face had done, he replied, “You <em>shall</em> bear my burden with me,”
 and a third time laid it on my shoulders.  For the last time I hurled it
 aside, and, with all my force, dashed him from me.  He reeled backward and
 fell, and before he could recover his disadvantage I had put a long distance
 between us.  
</p><p>
 Through the excitement of my struggle with this phantasm the effects of the
 hasheesh had increased mightily.  I was bursting with an uncontrollable life;
 I strode with the
 <a href="Notes/n79858.html" target="bottom" />thews</a>
 of a giant.  Hotter and faster came my breath; I seemed to pant like some
 tremendous engine.  An electric energy whirled me resistlessly onward; I
 feared for myself lest it should burst its fleshly walls, and glance on, 
 leaving a wrecked frame-work behind it. 
</p><p>
 At last I entered my own house.  During my absence a family connection had
 arrived from abroad, and stood ready to receive my greeting.  Partly restored
 to consciousness by the naturalness of home-faces and the powerful light of a 
 chandelier which shed its blaze through the room, I saw the necessity of
 vigilance against betraying my condition, and with an intense effort
 suppressing all I felt, I approached my friend, and said all that is usual on
 such occasions.  Yet recent as I was from my conflict with the supernatural, 
 I cast a stealthy look about me, that I might learn from the faces of the
 others if, after all, I was shaking hands with a phantom, and making
 inquiries about the health of a family of hallucinations.  Growing assured as
 I perceived no symptoms of astonishment, I finished the salutation and sat 
 down.  
</p><p>
 It soon required all my resolution to keep the secret which I had determined
 to hold inviolable.  My sensations began to be terrific — not from any pain
 that I felt, but from the tremendous mystery of all around me and within me.
 By an appalling introversion, all the operations of vitality which, in our
 ordinary state, go on unconsciously, came vividly into my experience.
 Through every thinnest corporeal tissue and minutest vein I could trace the 
 circulation of the blood along each inch of its progress.  I knew when every
 valve opened and when it shut; every sense was preternaturally awakened; the
 room was full of a great glory.  The beating of my heart was so clearly
 audible that I wondered to find it unnoticed by those who were sitting by my
 side.  Lo, now, that heart became a great fountain, whose jet played upward
 with loud vibrations, and, striking upon the roof of my skull as on a
 gigantic dome, fell back with a splash and echo into its reservoir.  Faster
 and faster came the pulsations, until at last I heard them no more, and the 
 stream became one continuously pouring flood, whose roar resounded through
 all my frame.  I gave myself up for lost, since judgment, which still sat
 unimpaired above my perverted senses, argued that
 <a href="Notes/n30753.html" target="bottom">congestion</a>
 must take place in a few moments, and close the drama with my death.  But my
 clutch would not yet relax from hope.  The thought struck me, Might not this
 rapidity of circulation be, after all, imaginary?  I determined to find out.  
</p><p>
 Going to my own room, I took out my watch, and placed my hand upon my heart.
 The very effort which I made to ascertain the reality gradually brought
 perception back to its natural state.  In the intensity of my observations, I 
 began to perceive that the circulation was not as rapid as I had thought.
 From a pulseless flow it gradually came to be apprehended as a hurrying
 succession of intense throbs, then less swift and less intense, till finally,
 on comparing it with the second-hand, I found that about 90 a minute was its 
 average rapidity.  Greatly comforted, I desisted from the experiment.  Almost
 instantly the hallucination returned.  Again I dreaded apoplexy,
 congestion, hemorrhage, a multiplicity of nameless deaths, and drew my
 picture as I might be found on the morrow, stark and cold, by those whose
 agony would be redoubled by the mystery of my end.  I reasoned with myself; I
 bathed my forehead — it did no good.  There was one resource left: I would
 go to a physician.  
</p><p>
 With this resolve, I left my room and went to the head of the staircase.
 The family had all retired for the night, and the gas was turned off from the
 burner in the hall below.  I looked down the stairs: the depth was
 fathomless; it was a journey of years to reach the bottom! The dim light of
 the sky shone through the narrow panes at the sides of the front door, and
 seemed a demon-lamp in the middle darkness of the abyss.  I never could get
 down! I sat me down despairingly upon the topmost step.  
</p><p>
 Suddenly a sublime thought possessed me.  If the distance is infinite, I am
 immortal.  It shall be tried.  I commenced the descent, wearily, wearily down
 through my league-long, year-long journey.  To record my impressions in that
 journey would be to repeat what I have said of the time of hasheesh.  Now
 stopping to rest as a traveler would turn aside at a wayside inn, now toiling
 down through the lonely darkness, I came by-and-by to the end, and passed out
 into the street.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>II. Under the Shadow of Esculapius</h2>
<p>
 On reaching the porch of the physician’s house, I rang the bell, but
 immediately forgot whom to ask for.  No wonder; I was on the steps of a
 palace in Milan — no (and I laughed at myself for the blunder), I was on the
 staircase of the Tower of London.  So I should not be puzzled through my 
 ignorance of Italian.  But whom to ask for?  This question recalled me to the
 real bearings of the place, but did not suggest its requisite answer. Whom
 shall I ask for?  I began setting the most cunning traps of hypothesis to
 catch the solution of the difficulty.  I looked at the surrounding houses; of
 whom had I been accustomed to think as living next door to them? This did not
 bring it.  Whose daughter had I seen going to school from this house but the
 very day before?  Her name was Julia — Julia — and I thought of every
 combination which had been made with this name from
 <a href="Notes/n55000.html" target="bottom">Julia Domna</a>
 down to
 <a href="Notes/n71579.html" target="bottom">Giulia Grisi</a>.
 Ah! now I had it — Julia H.; and her father naturally bore the same name.
 During this intellectual rummage I had rung the bell half a dozen times,
 under the impression that I was kept waiting a small eternity.  When the
 servant opened the door she panted as if she had run for her life.  I was
 shown up stairs to Dr. H.’s room, where he had thrown himself down to rest
 after a tedious operation.  Locking the door after me with an air of
 determined secrecy, which must have conveyed to him pleasant little
 suggestions of a design upon his life, I approached his bedside.
</p><p>
 “I am about to reveal to you,” I commenced, “something which I would not for
 my life allow to come into other ears.  Do you pledge me your eternal
 silence?”
</p><p>
 “I do; what is the matter?”
</p><p>
 “I have been taking hasheesh — Cannabis Indica, and I fear that I am going
 to die.”
</p><p>
 “How much did you take?”
</p><p>
 “<a href="Notes/n49808.html" target="bottom">Thirty grains</a>.”
</p><p>
 “Let me feel your pulse.”  He placed his finger on my wrist and counted
 slowly, while I stood waiting to hear my death-warrant.  “Very regular,”
 shortly spoke the doctor; “triflingly accelerated.  Do you feel any pain?”
 “None at all.”  “Nothing the matter with you; go home and go to bed.”  “But
 — is there — is there — no — danger of — apoplexy?”
 “Bah!” said the doctor; and, having delivered himself of
 <a href="Notes/n91865.html" target="bottom">this very Abernethy-like opinion
 of my case</a>, he lay down again.  My hand was on the knob, when he
 stopped me with, “Wait a minute; I’ll give you a powder to carry with you,
 and if you get frightened again after you leave me, you can take it as a
 sedative. Step out on the landing, if you please, and call my servant.”
</p><p>
 I did so, and my voice seemed to reverberate like thunder from every recess
 in the whole building.  I was terrified at the noise I had made.  I learned
 in after days that this impression is only one of the many due to the intense 
 susceptibility of the sensorium
 as produced by hasheesh.  At one time, having asked a friend to check me if I
 talked loudly or immoderately while in a state of fantasia among persons from
 whom I wished to conceal my state, I caught myself shouting and singing from
 very ecstasy, and reproached him with a neglect of his friendly office.  I
 could not believe him when he assured me that I had not uttered an audible
 word.  The intensity of the inward emotion had affected the external through
 the internal ear.
</p><p>
 I returned and stood at the foot of the doctor’s bed.  All was perfect
 silence in the room, and had been perfect darkness also but for the small
 lamp which I held in my hand to light the preparation of the powder when it
 should come.  And now a still sublimer mystery began to enwrap me.  I stood
 in a remote chamber at the top of a colossal building, and the whole fabric
 beneath me was steadily growing into the air.  Higher than the topmost
 pinnacle of
 <a href="Notes/n47861.html" target="bottom">Bel’s Babylonish temple</a>
 — higher than
 <a href="Notes/n62775.html" target="bottom">Ararat</a>
 — on, on forever into the lonely dome of God’s infinite universe we towered 
 ceaselessly.  The years flew on; I heard the musical rush of their wings in
 the abyss outside of me, and from cycle to cycle, from life to life I
 careered, a mote in eternity and space.  Suddenly emerging from the orbit of
 my transmigrations, I was again at the foot of the doctor’s bed, and thrilled
 with wonder to find that we were both unchanged by the measureless lapse of
 time.  The servant had not come.
</p><p>
 “Shall I call her again?”  “Why, you have this moment called her.” “Doctor,”
 I replied solemnly, and in language that would have seemed bombastic enough
 to any one who did not realize what I felt, “I will not believe you are
 deceiving me, but to me it appears as if sufficient time has elapsed since
 then for all the Pyramids to have crumbled back to dust.” “Ha! ha! you are
 very funny to-night,” said the doctor; “but here she comes, and I will send
 her for something which will comfort you on that score, and reestablish the
 Pyramids in your confidence.”  He gave the girl his orders, and she went out
 again.
</p><p>
 The thought struck me that I would compare <em>my time</em> with other
 people’s.  I looked at my watch, found that its minute-hand stood at the
 quarter mark past eleven, and, returning it to my pocket, abandoned myself to
 my reflections.
</p><p>
 Presently I saw myself a gnome imprisoned by a most weird enchanter, whose
 part I assigned to the doctor before me, in
 <a href="Notes/n69895.html" target="bottom">the Domdaniel caverns, “under the
 roots of the ocean.”</a>  Here, until the dissolution of all things,
 was I doomed to hold the lamp that lit that abysmal darkness, while my heart,
 like a giant clock, ticked solemnly the remaining years of time. Now, this
 hallucination departing, I heard in the solitude of the night outside the
 sound of a wondrous heaving sea.  Its waves in sublime cadence, rolled forward 
 till they met the foundations of the building; they smote them with a might
 which made the very topstone quiver, and then fell back, with hiss and hollow
 murmur, into the broad bosom whence they had arisen. Now through the street,
 with measured tread, an armed host passed by.  The heavy beat of their
 footfall and the griding of their brazen corslet-rings alone broke the
 silence, for among them all there was no more speech nor music than in a
 battalion of the dead.  It was the army of the ages going by into eternity.
 A godlike sublimity swallowed up my soul.  I was overwhelmed in a fathomless
 <a href="Notes/n68307.html" target="bottom">barathrum</a>
 of time, but I leaned on God, and was immortal through all changes.
</p><p>
 And now, in another life, I remembered that far back in the cycles I had
 looked at my watch to measure the time through which I passed.  The impulse
 seized me to look again.  The minute-hand stood half way between fifteen and
 sixteen minutes past eleven.  The watch must have stopped; I held it to my
 ear; no, it was still going.  I had traveled through all that immeasurable
 chain of dreams in thirty seconds.  “My God!” I cried, “I am in eternity.”
 In the presence of that first sublime revelation of the soul’s own time, and 
 her capacity for an infinite life, I stood trembling with breathless awe.
 Till I die, that moment of unveiling will stand in clear relief from all the
 rest of my existence.  I hold it still in unimpaired remembrance as one of the 
 unutterable sanctities of my being.  The years of all my earthly life to come
 can never be as long as those thirty seconds.
</p><p>
 Finally the servant reappeared.  I received my powder and went home. There
 was a light in one of the upper windows, and I hailed it with unspeakable
 joy, for it relieved me from a fear which I could not conquer, that while I
 had been gone all familiar things had passed away from earth. I was hardly
 safe in my room before I doubted having ever been out of it. “I have
 experienced some wonderful dream,” said I, “as I lay here after coming from
 the parlor.”  If I had not been out, I reasoned that I would have no powder
 in my pocket.  The powder was there, and it steadied me a little to find that
 I was not utterly hallucinated on every point.  Leaving the light burning, I
 set out to travel to my bed, which gently invited me in the distance.
 Reaching it after a sufficient walk, I threw myself down.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>III. The Kingdom of the Dream</h2>
<p>
 The moment that I closed my eyes a vision of celestial glory burst upon me.
 I stood on the silver strand of a translucent, boundless lake, across whose
 bosom I seemed to have been just transported.  A short way up the beach, a 
 temple, modeled like the Parthenon,
 lifted its spotless and gleaming columns of alabaster sublimely into a rosy
 air — like the Parthenon, yet as much excelling it as the godlike ideal of
 architecture must transcend the ideal realized by man.  Unblemished in its
 purity of whiteness, faultless in the unbroken symmetry of every line and
 angle, its pediment was draped in odorous clouds, whose tints outshone the 
 rainbow.  <a href="Notes/n65185.html" target="bottom">It was the work of an
 unearthly builder</a>, and my soul stood before it in a trance of ecstasy.
 Its folded doors were resplendent with the glory
 of a multitude of eyes of glass, which were inlaid throughout the marble
 surfaces at the corners of diamond figures from the floor of the porch to the
 topmost moulding.  One of these eyes was golden, like the midday sun, another
 emerald, another sapphire, and thus onward through the whole gamut of hues,
 all of them set in such collocations
 as to form most exquisite harmonies, and whirling upon their axes with the
 rapidity of thought.  At the mere vestibule of the temple I could have sat
 and drunk in ecstasy forever; but lo! I am yet more blessed.  On silent
 hinges the doors swing open, and I pass in.
</p><p>
 I did not seem to be in the interior of a temple.  I beheld myself as truly
 in the open air as if I had never passed the portals, for whichever way I
 looked there were no walls, no roof, no pavement.  An atmosphere of
 fathomless and soul-satisfying serenity surrounded and transfused me.  I
 stood upon the bank of a crystal stream, whose waters, as they slid on,
 discoursed notes of music which tinkled on the ear like the tones of some
 exquisite bell-glass.  The same impression which such tones produce, of music
 refined to its ultimate ethereal spirit and borne from a far distance,
 characterized every ripple of those translucent waves.  The gently sloping
 banks of the stream were luxuriant with a velvety cushioning of grass and
 moss, so living green that the eye and the soul reposed on them at the same
 time and drank in peace.  Through this
 <a href="Notes/n92138.html" target="bottom">amaranthine</a>
 herbage strayed the gnarled, fantastic roots of giant
 cedars of Lebanon,
 from whose primeval trunks great branches spread above me, and interlocking,
 wove a roof of impenetrable shadow; and wandering down the still avenues
 below those grand arboreal arches went glorious bards, whose snowy beards
 fell on their breasts beneath countenances of ineffable benignity and
 nobleness.
</p><p>
 They were all clad in flowing robes, like God’s high-priests, and each one
 held in his hand a lyre of unearthly workmanship.  Presently one stops midway
 down a shady walk, and, baring his right arm, begins a prelude. While his
 celestial chords were trembling up into their sublime fullness, another
 strikes his strings, and now they blend upon my ravished ear in such a
 symphony as was never heard elsewhere, and I shall never hear again out of
 the Great Presence.  A moment more, and three are playing in harmony; now the
 fourth joins the glorious rapture of his music to their own, and in the
 completeness of the chord my soul is swallowed up.  I can bear no more.  But
 yes, I am sustained, for suddenly the whole throng break forth in a chorus,
 upon whose wings I am lifted out of the
 <a href="Notes/n85367.html" target="bottom">riven</a>
 walls of sense, and music and spirit thrill in immediate communion.  Forever
 rid of the intervention of pulsing air and vibrating nerve, my soul dilates
 with the swell of that transcendent harmony, and interprets from it
 <a href="Notes/n04904.html" target="bottom">arcana</a>
 of a meaning which words can never tell.  I am borne aloft upon the glory of
 sound.  I float in a trance among the burning choir of the seraphim.
 But, as I am melting through the purification of that sublime ecstasy into
 oneness with the Deity himself, one by one those pealing lyrics faint away,
 and as the last throb dies down along the measureless ether, visionless arms 
 swiftly as lightning carry me far into the profound, and set me down before
 another portal.  Its leaves, like the first, are of spotless marble, but
 ungemmed with wheeling eyes of burning color.
</p><p>
 Before entering on the record of this new vision I will make a digression,
 for the purpose of introducing two laws of the hasheesh operation, which, as
 explicatory, deserve a place here.  First, after the completion of any one
 fantasia has arrived, there almost invariably succeeds a shifting of the
 action to some other stage entirely different in its surroundings.  In this
 transition the general character of the emotion may remain unchanged.  I may
 be happy in Paradise and happy at the sources of the Nile, but seldom, either
 in Paradise or on the Nile, twice in succession.  I may
 <a href="Notes/n29039.html" target="bottom">writhe in Etna and burn
 unquenchably in Gehenna</a>, but almost never, in the course of the same
 delirium, shall Etna or Gehenna witness my torture a second time.
</p><p>
 Second, after the full storm of a vision of intense sublimity has blown past
 the hasheesh-eater, his next vision is generally of a quiet, relaxing, and
 recreating nature.  He comes down from his clouds or up from his abyss into a 
 middle ground of gentle shadow, where he may rest his eyes from the splendor
 of the seraphim or the flames of fiends.  There is a wise philosophy in this
 arrangement, for otherwise the soul would soon burn out in the excess of its 
 own oxygen.  Many a time, it seems to me, has my own thus been saved from
 extinction.
</p><p>
 This next vision illustrated both, but especially the latter of these laws.
 The temple-doors opened noiselessly before me, but it was no scene of
 sublimity which thus broke in upon my eyes.  I stood in a large apartment,
 which resembled the Senate-chamber at Washington more than any thing else to 
 which I can compare it.  Its roof was vaulted, and at the side opposite the
 entrance the floor rose into a dais surmounted by a large arm-chair.  The
 body of the house was occupied by similar chairs disposed in arcs; the heavy
 paneling of the walls was adorned with grotesque frescoes of every
 imaginable bird, beast, and monster, which, by some hidden law of life and
 motion, were forever changing, like the figures of the kaleidoscope.  Now the
 walls bristled with hippogriffs; now, from wainscot to ceiling, toucans and
 <a href="Notes/n50196.html" target="bottom">maccataws</a>
 swung and nodded from their perches amid emerald palms; now
 <a href="Notes/n50269.html" target="bottom">Centaurs and Lapithæ</a>
 clashed in ferocious tumult, while
 <a href="Notes/n01890.html" target="bottom">crater and cyathus</a>
 were crushed beneath ringing hoof and heel.  But my attention was quickly
 distracted from the frescoes by the sight of a most witchly congress, which
 filled all the chairs of that broad chamber.  On the dais sat an old crone,
 whose commanding position first engaged my attention to her personal
 appearance, and, upon rather impolite scrutiny, I beheld that she was the 
 product of an art held in preeminent favor among persons of her age and sex.
 She was <em>knit</em> of purple yarn!  In faultless order the stitches ran
 along her face; in every pucker of her reentrant mouth, in every wrinkle of
 her brow, she was a yarny counterfeit of the grandam
 of actual life, and by some skillful process of stuffing her nose had
 received its due peak and her chin its projection.  The occupants of the 
 seats below were all but reproductions of their president, and both she and
 they were constantly swaying from side to side, forward and back, to the
 music of some invisible instruments, whose tone and style were most intensely
 and ludicrously Ethiopian. Not a word was spoken by any of the woolly
 conclave, but with untiring industry they were all knitting, knitting,
 knitting ceaselessly, as if their lives depended on it.  I looked to see the
 objects of their manufacture. They were knitting old women like themselves!  
 One of the sisterhood had nearly brought her double to completion; earnestly
 another was engaged in rounding out an eyeball; another was fastening the
 gathers at the corners of a mouth; another was setting up stitches for an old
 woman
 <a href="Notes/n07405.html" target="bottom">in petto</a>.
</p><p>
 With marvelous rapidity this work went on; ever and anon some completed crone
 sprang from the needles which had just achieved her, and, instantly vivified,
 took up the instruments of reproduction, and fell to work as assiduously as
 if she had been a member of the congress since the world began.  “Here,” I
 cried, “here, at last, do I realize the meaning of endless progression!” and,
 though the dome echoed with my peals of laughter, I saw no motion of
 astonishment in the stitches of a single face, but, as for dear life, the
 manufacture of old women went on unobstructed by the involuntary rudeness of
 the stranger.
</p><p>
 An irresistible desire to aid in the work possessed me; I was half determined
 to snatch up a quartette of needles and join the sisterhood.  My nose began
 to be ruffled with stitches, and the next moment I had been a partner in their 
 yarny destinies but for a hand which pulled me backward through the door, and
 shut the congress forever from my view.
</p><p>
 For a season I abode in an utter void of sight and sound, but I waited
 patiently in the assurance that some new changes of magnificence were
 preparing for me.  I was not disappointed.  Suddenly, at a far distance,
 three intense luminous points stood on the triple wall of darkness, and
 through each of them shot twin attenuated rays of magic light and music.
 Without being able to perceive any thing of my immediate surroundings, I
 still felt that I was noiselessly drifting toward those radiant and vocal
 points.  With every moment they grew larger, the light and the harmony came
 clearer, and before long I could distinguish plainly three colossal arches
 rising from the bosom of a waveless water.  The mid arch towered highest; the
 two on either side were equal to each other.  Presently I beheld that they
 formed the portals of an enormous cavern, whose dome rose above me into such
 sublimity that its cope
 was hidden from my eyes in wreaths of cloud. On each side of me ran a wall of
 gnarled and rugged rock, from whose jutting points, as high as the eye could
 reach, depended stalactites of every imagined form and tinge of beauty, while
 below me, in the semblance of an ebon
 pavement, from the reflection of its overshadowing crags, lay a level lake,
 whose exquisite transparency wanted but the smile of the sun to make it glow 
 like a floor of adamant.
 On this lake I lay in a little boat divinely carved from pearl after the
 similitude of
 <a href="Notes/n86640.html" target="bottom">Triton’s shelly shallop</a>;
 its rudder and its oarage were my own unconscious will, and, without the
 labors of especial volition, I floated as I list with a furrowless keel
 swiftly toward the central giant arch.  With every moment that brought me
 nearer to my exit, the harmony that poured through it developed into a
 grander volume and an intenser beauty.
</p><p>
 And now I passed out.
</p><p>
 <a href="Notes/n21615.html" target="bottom">Claude Lorraine</a>,
 freed from the limitations of sense, and gifted with an infinite canvas, may,
 for aught I know, be upon some halcyon island of the universe painting such a 
 view as now sailed into my vision.  Fitting employment would it be for his
 immortality were his pencil dipped into the very fountains of the light.
 Many a time in the course of my life have I yearned for the possession of
 some grand old master’s soul and culture in the presence of revelations of
 Nature’s loveliness which I dared not trust to memory; before this vision, as
 now in the remembrance of it, that longing became a heartfelt pain.  Yet
 after all, it was well; the mortal
 <a href="Notes/n96616.html" target="bottom">limner</a>
 would have fainted his task.  Alas! how does the material in which we must
 embody the spiritual cramp and resist its execution!  Standing before windows 
 where the invisible spirit of the frost had traced his exquisite algae, his
 palms and his ferns, have I said to myself, with a sigh, Ah! Nature alone, of
 all artists, is gifted to work out her ideals!
</p><p>
 Shall I be so presumptuous as to attempt in words that which would beggar the
 palette and the pencil of old-time disciples of the beautiful?  I will, if it
 be only to satisfy a deep longing.
</p><p>
 From the arches of my cavern I had emerged upon a horizonless sea. Through
 all the infinitudes around me I looked out, and met no boundaries of space.
 Often in after times have I beheld the heavens and the earth stretching out 
 in parallel lines forever, but this was the first time I had ever stood
 un-<a href="Notes/n05638.html" target="bottom">“ringed by the azure world,”</a>
 and I exulted in all the sublimity of the new conception.  The whole
 atmosphere was one measureless suffusion of golden motes, which throbbed
 continually in cadence, and showered radiance and harmony at the same time.
 With ecstasy vision spread her wings for a flight against which material laws
 locked no barrier, and every moment grew more and more entranced at further
 and fuller glimpses of a beauty which floated like incense from the pavement
 of that eternal sea. With ecstasy the spiritual ear gathered in continually
 some more distant and unimaginable tone, and grouped the growing harmonics
 into one sublime chant of benediction.  With ecstasy the whole soul drank in
 revelations from every province, and cried out,
 <a href="Notes/n04673.html" target="bottom">“Oh, awful loveliness!”</a>
 And now out of my shallop I was borne away into the full light of the mid
 firmament; now seated on some toppling peak of a cloud-mountain, whose
 yawning rifts disclosed far down the mines of reserved lightning; now bathed
 in my ethereal travel by the rivers of the rainbow, which, side by side,
 coursed through the valleys of heaven; now dwelling for a season in the
 environment of unbroken sunlight, yet bearing it like the eagle with
 undazzled eye; now crowned with a coronal
 of prismatic beads of dew.  Through whatever region or circumstances I
 passed, one characteristic of the vision remained unchanged: peace —
 everywhere godlike peace, the sum of all conceivable desires satisfied.
</p><p>
 Slowly I floated down to earth again.  There Oriental gardens waited to
 receive me.  From fountain to fountain I danced in graceful mazes with
 inimitable
 <a href="Notes/n31875.html" target="bottom">houris</a>,
 whose foreheads were bound with
 fillets
 of jasmine.  I pelted with figs the rare exotic birds, whose gold and crimson
 wings went flashing from branch to branch, or
 wheedled
 them to me with Arabic phrases of endearment.  Through avenues of palm I
 walked arm-in-arm with
 <a href="Notes/n04546.html" target="bottom">Hafiz</a>,
 and heard the hours flow singing through the channels of his matchless
 poetry.  In gay kiosques I quaffed my sherbet,
 and in the luxury of lawlessness kissed away by drops
 <a href="Notes/n54708.html" target="bottom">that other juice which is
 contraband unto the faithful</a>.  And now beneath citron
 shadows I laid me down to sleep.  When I awoke it was morning — actually
 morning, and not a hasheesh hallucination. The first emotion that I felt upon
 opening my eyes was happiness to find things again wearing a natural air.
 Yes; although the last experience of which I had been conscious had seemed to
 satisfy every human want, physical or spiritual, I smiled on the four plain
 white walls of my bed-chamber, and hailed their familiar unostentatiousness 
 with a pleasure which had no wish to transfer itself to arabesque or
 rainbows.  It was like returning home from an eternity spent in loneliness
 among the palaces of strangers.  Well may I say an eternity, for during the
 whole day I could not rid myself of the feeling that I was separated from the 
 preceding one by an immeasurable lapse of time.  In face, I never got wholly
 rid of it.
</p><p>
 I rose that I might test my reinstated powers, and see if the restoration was
 complete.  Yes, I felt not one trace of bodily weariness nor mental
 depression.  Every function had returned to its normal state, with the one
 exception mentioned; memory could not efface the traces of my having passed
 through a great mystery.  I recalled the events of the past night, and was
 pleased to think that I had betrayed myself to no one but Dr. H.  I was
 satisfied with my experiment.
</p><p>
 Ah! would that I had been satisfied!  Yet history must go on.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>IV. <a href="Notes/n92291.html" target="bottom">Cashmere and Cathay</a> by Twilight</h2>
<p>
 “You will never take it again, will you?”
</p><p>
 “Oh no, I never expect to; I am satisfied with my one successful experiment.”
</p><p>
 It was the fair lady of the crochet-needle who asked me the question as, a
 few days after my first practical acquaintance with hasheesh, I gave her the
 recital contained in the preceding pages.  In my answer I spoke truly; I did 
 suppose that I never should repeat my experiment.  The glimpse which I had
 gained in that single night of revelation of hitherto unconceived modes and
 uncharted fields of spiritual being seemed enough to store the treasure-house
 of grand memories for a lifetime.  Unutterably more, doubtless, still
 remained unveiled, but it contented me to say,</p>
<blockquote><a href="Notes/n53544.html" target="bottom">
  	“In Nature’s infinite book of secrecy<br />
 	 &nbsp;A little I can read,”
</a></blockquote><p>
 when that little swept a view whose faintest lineament outshone all the
 characters upon the scroll of daily existence.  No, I never should take it
 again.
</p><p>
 I did not know myself; I did not know hasheesh.  There are temperaments, no
 doubt, upon which this drug produces, as a reactory result, physical and
 mental depression.  With me, this was never the case.  Opium and liquors fix
 themselves as a habit by becoming necessary to supply that nervous waste
 which they in the first place occasioned.  The lassitude which succeeds their
 exaltation demands a renewed indulgence, and accordingly every gratification
 of the appetite is parent to the next.  But no such element entered into the
 causes which attached me to hasheesh.  I speak confidently, yet without
 exaggeration, when I say that I have spent many an hour in torture such as
 was never known by
 <a href="Notes/n90915.html" target="bottom">Cranmer at the stake</a>,
 or
 <a href="Notes/n64990.html" target="bottom">Gaudentio di Lucca in the Inquisition</a>,
 yet out of the depths of such experience <em>I</em> have always come without
 a trace of its effect in diminished strength or buoyancy.
</p><p>
 Had the first experiment been followed by depression, I had probably never
 repeated it.  At any rate, unstrung muscles and an enervated mind could have
 been resisted much more effectually when they pleaded for renewed indulgence
 than the form which the fascination actually took.  For days I 
was even unusually strong; all the forces of life were in a 
state of pleasurable activity, but the memory of the 
wondrous glories which I had beheld wooed me continually 
like an irresistible sorceress.  I could not shut my eyes 
for midday musing without beholding in that world, half 
dark, half light, beneath the eyelids, a steady procession 
of delicious images which the severest will could not banish 
nor dim.  Now through an immense and serene sky floated 
luxurious argosies of clouds, continually changing form and 
tint through an infinite cycle of mutations.
</p><p>
Now, suddenly emerging from some deep embowerment of woods, 
I stood upon the banks of a broad river that curved far off 
into dreamy distance, and glided noiselessly past its 
jutting headlands, reflecting a light which was not of the 
sun nor of the moon, but midway between them, and here and 
there thrilling with subdued prismatic rays.  Temples and 
gardens, fountains and vistas stretched continually through 
my waking or sleeping imagination, and mingled themselves 
with all I heard, or read, or saw.  On
<a href="Notes/n57465.html" target="bottom">the pages of Gibbon</a>
the palaces and lawns of
<a href="Notes/n75703.html" target="bottom">Nicomedia</a>
were illustrated with a 
hasheesh tint and a hasheesh reality; and journeying with 
<a href="Notes/n04927.html" target="bottom">old Dan Chaucer</a>,
I drank in a delicious landscape of revery 
along all the road to Canterbury.  The music of my vision 
was still heard in echo; as
<a href="Notes/n53484.html" target="bottom">the bells of Bow of old time
called to Whittington</a>,
so did it call to me — “Turn again, turn again.” And I turned.
</p><p>
 Censure me not harshly, ye who have never known what fascination there is in
 the ecstasy of beauty; there are baser attractions than those which invited
 me.  Perhaps ye yourselves have turned from the first simple-mindedness of
 life to be led by the power of a more sordid wooing.  The hope of being one
 day able to sleep lazily in a literally golden sun, the
 <a href="Notes/n87795.html" target="bottom">lazzaroni</a>
 of fortune; of securing a patient hearing for some influential and patriotic
 whisper in the ear of the
 <a href="Notes/n70035.html" target="bottom">“mobilium turba Quiritium;”</a>
 of draining any cup which drugs the soul and leaves the body to rifle it of
 its prerogative — each and all of these are lower fascinations than that to
 which I yielded.
</p><p>
 And ye better, wiser, and therefore gentler ones, who decry not another’s
 weakness because it is not your own, who are free from all bondage, be it of
 the sordid or the beautiful, be kindly in your judgement. Wherein I was wrong
 I was invited as by a mother’s voice, and the blandishments which lulled me
 were full of such spiritual sweetness as we hear only twice in a lifetime —
 once at its opening, once at its close; the first time in the cradle-hymn
 that lulls innocence to slumber, the last in that music of attendant angels
 through which the soul begins to float upward in its euthanasia toward the
 restoration of primeval purity and peace.  I yielded to no sensual
 gratification.  The motives for the hasheesh-indulgence were of the most
 exalted ideal nature, for of this nature are all its ecstasies and its
 revelations — yes, and a thousand-fold more terrible, for this very reason,
 its unutterable pangs.  I yielded, moreover, without realizing to what.
 Within a circle of
 <a href="Notes/n08120.html" target="bottom">one hundred miles</a>’
 radius there was not a living soul who
 knew or could warn me of my danger.  Finally, I yielded without knowing that
 I yielded, for I ascribed my next indulgence to a desire of research.
</p><p>
 One day, about the hour of noon, a little more than a week after my first
 experiment, I rolled
 <a href="Notes/n79735.html" target="bottom">twenty grains</a>
 of hasheesh into a pill and swallowed it, saying as I did so, “Here is the
 final test for the sake of science.”  The afternoon lay before me unoccupied
 by any especial appointment, and, after dining, I threw myself down upon a 
 lounge to await the result of the dose.  The day was soft and hazy, and its
 influence lay so
 <a href="Notes/n28716.html" target="bottom">nepenthe</a>-like
 upon my eyelids, that before long, without knowing it, I fell asleep.  It was
 tea-time when I awoke, and I had not experienced any visions.  A friend of
 mine joined me at the table, and when we pushed back our chairs, he proposed
 that we should take a walk.  Every thing above, below, around us united in
 the invitation.  It was one of those evenings when the universal sense of
 balminess makes all outdoors as homelike and delicious as the cheeriest
 winter fireside can be, with its enlivenment of ruddy blaze, and its charm of 
 sheltered privacy.  The very soul seems turned inside out for an airing, and
 we are almost ashamed of ourselves for ever preferring rafters to the sky,
 and fleeing from the presence of Nature to find a home.
</p><p>
 Through all the streets that ran toward the west the sun was sending a thrill
 of light from his good-by place on the horizon, and the pavements were a
 mosaic of dancing leaf-shadows and golden polygons, forever shifting as the
 trees quivered over us in the gentlest of southern winds.  Arm-in-arm with
 <a href="Notes/n84967.html" target="bottom">Dan</a>,
 I strolled down the checkered avenue, and more and more luxuriant grew
 the sunset as we came gradually out of the environment of houses and breathed
 the air of the open country.  The suburbs of
 <a href="Notes/n13542.html" target="bottom">P——</a>
 are very beautiful.  If the stranger knows it and remarks it, it is not
 because he is smitten with the mere novelty of his view.  There are few
 landscapes which will bear so frequent beholding — few whose admirers so soon
 and lastingly become their lovers.  Were there any jealousy in my love for
 that, my own home-scenery, I know no season which would ever have given me
 more pangs for fear of a rival than the one of which I speak, for the earth
 and sky were fair around us, even with a human fascination.  Of my companion
 let me say that which any man of varying moods will realize to be one of the
 highest eulogies that can be passed upon a friend.  Dan was one of those
 choice spirits whom you are always glad to have beside you, whatever may be
 your feeling.  He belonged to that rare and sensitive order of beings who can
 never become uncongenial to one who has once been in sympathy with them.  How
 many a time, most valued and longed-for one, have I tested this in thee! How
 often, in this very intuitive perception of our accordance, have I felt the
 proof that friendship is as inborn a principle in hearts as the quality of
 their harmony in tones of a chord.
</p><p>
 There is a road running south from the suburbs of P—— which in many
 respects affords one of the most delightful walks which can be imagined.  On
 the one hand, for a long distance, a terraced embankment rises luxuriantly
 green through all the days of summer, and crowned with picturesque
 <a href="Notes/n94657.html" target="bottom">rusurban</a>
 cottages.  On the other, a broad table-land stretches away to the abrupt
 banks of the Hudson, dotted over all its surface with clumps of healthful
 trees and embowered villas.  Here and there, through the fringes of shade
 which skirt the brink, delicious views of the river break upon the eye, with
 a background of mountains, still unsubdued by labor, rising in primeval
 freshness from the other side.  Under the tutelar protection of their evening 
 shadows the farther water lay, at the season of which I speak, like a divine
 child asleep, watched by an eternal nurse.
</p><p>
 Along this road we traveled arm-in-arm, so filled and overcome with the
 beauty of the view that we read each other’s feelings and went silently.
 Perhaps we had come
 <a href="Notes/n80298.html" target="bottom">half a mile</a>
 from the town when, without the smallest
 premonition, I was smitten by the hasheesh thrill as by a thunderbolt. Though
 I had felt it but once in a life before, its sign was as unmistakable as the
 most familiar thing of daily life.  I have often been asked to explain the
 nature of this thrill, and have as often tried to do it, but no analogue
 exists which will represent it perfectly, hardly even approximately.  The
 nearest resemblance to the feeling is that contained in our idea of the
 instantaneous separation of soul and body.  Very few in the world have ever
 known before absolute death what state accompanies this separation, yet we
 all of us have an idea more or less distinct of that which it must be when
 it arrives.  Even on this vague conception I throw myself for the sake of
 being understood with more confidence than I would dare to give to the most
 thorough description that I could elaborate.
</p><p>
 The road along which we walked began slowly to lengthen.  The hill over which
 it disappeared, at the distance of
 <a href="Notes/n80298.html" target="bottom">half a mile</a>
 from me, soon came to be
 perceived as the boundary of the continent itself.  But for the infinite
 loveliness of the sky, and waters, and fields, I should have been as greatly
 terrified with the increasing mystery of my state as I had been at the
 commencement of my first experience.  But a most beautiful sunset was dying
 in the west, the river was tinged by it, the very zenith clouds were bathed
 in it, and the world beneath seemed to be floating in a dream of rosy
 tranquility.  My awakened perceptions drank in this beauty until all sense of
 fear was banished, and every vein ran flooded with the very wine of delight.
 Mystery enwrapped me still, but it was the mystery of one who walks in
 Paradise for the first time.
</p><p>
 Could I keep it from Dan?  No, not for a moment.  I had no remembrance of
 having taken hasheesh.  The past was the property of another life, and I
 supposed that all the world was reveling in the same ecstasy as myself.  I
 cast off all restraint; I leaped into the air; I clapped my hands, and
 shouted for joy.  An involuntary exclamation raised the mustache of the poet
 beside me.  “What in the world,” he cried, “is the matter with you?”  I could
 only answer, “Bliss! bliss! unimagined bliss!”  In an instant he saw all, for
 he knew my former experience, and as quickly formed the resolution of
 humoring me to the utmost in all my vagaries.
</p><p>
 I glowed like a new-born soul.  The well-known landscape lost all of its
 familiarity, and I was setting out upon a journey of years through heavenly
 territories, which it had been the longing of my previous lifetime to
 behold.  “My dear friend,” I said, “we are about to realize all our youthful
 dreams of travel.  Together you and I will wander on foot at our will through
 strange and beauteous countries; our life spreads before us henceforward
 unoccupied by cares, and the riches of all nature stretch onward through the 
 immense domain we see in exultant expectancy to become the food for our
 thought and the fountains of our delight.  To think that we should have been
 spared until this day — spared to each other, spared for such glorious
 scenes!  My friend, we shall travel together, linked soul to soul, and
 gaining ecstasy by impartition.  At night, beneath the shade of zephyr-fanned
 mimosas, we shall lay ourselves down to sleep on the banks of primeval Asian
 rivers, and
 <a href="Notes/n01260.html" target="bottom">Bulbul</a>
 shall sing us to sleep with his most delicious madrigals.  When the first
 auroral tinges are glassed back from the peaks of
 <a href="Notes/n42726.html" target="bottom">Himmaleh</a>,
 we will arise, and, bathing ourselves in rock-o’ershadowed fountains, will
 start again upon our immortal way.  Sleep shall repeat the echoes of the day
 to another and unfatigued inner sense of dreams, and awaking shall bear
 repetition of birth into newer and still more enchanting life.  On! on!”
</p><p>
 “I will go,” said my friend, “with delight.”  Not a shadow of incredulousness
 or inappreciation passed over his face, and, drawing his arm still closer
 through my own, I hastened onward, as delighted with his consent as I was
 thoroughly convinced of the reality of the presence of grand old Asia.
</p><p>
 The peculiar time of hasheesh, already so frequently mentioned, added one
 more rapturous element to my enjoyment.  Through leagues of travel the
 shadows did not deepen around us, but the same unutterable sunset peace and
 beauty transfused the earth unchangeably.  In watching the glories of the
 west at sunset in our ordinary state, they pass away from us so soon that
 they dying lustres have become to us almost the synonym for transition and
 decay.  The golden masses become ruddy, the ruddy fall away to purple, the
 purple speedily grow black, and all this transmutation occupies no longer
 time than we may lean our foreheads, unfatigued, against a window-pane.  In
 my present state of enlarged perception, Time had no kaleidoscope for me;
 nothing grew faint, nothing shifted, nothing changed except my ecstasy, which
 heightened through interminable degrees to behold the same rose-radiance
 lighting us up along all our immense journey.  I might style my present
 chapter “Notes of Travel through the Champaigns of perpetual Sunset.”
</p><p>
 From the road along which we traveled another leads back into P——, across a
 more precipitous hill than any we had already ascended.  Into this second
 road we turned.  Yet, from the absence of all familiar appearances in the
 world around me, I did not suppose that we were returning to the town, but
 merely that we were continuing our journey through a new and less frequented
 by-path.  Presently we struck a plank walk, and began mounting the hill of
 which I have spoken.
</p><p>
 The moment that the planks began to resound beneath our feet I realized in
 what part of Asia we were journeying.  We were on the great wall of China.
 Below us stretched into grand distances the plains of
 <a href="Notes/n87954.html" target="bottom">Thibet</a>.
 Multitudinous were the flocks that covered them; countless groups of goats
 and goatherds were dispersed over the landscape as far as the eye could
 reach.  The banks of innumerable streams were dotted with picturesque tents,
 and every minutest detail of the view in all respects harmonized with the
 idea of Asiatic life.  Beyond Thibet, as with clairvoyant eyes, I looked
 straight through and over
 <a href="Notes/n43134.html" target="bottom">Hindoo Koosh</a>,
 and beheld Cashmere sleeping in grand shadows.  The fountains of the
 <a href="Notes/n84657.html" target="bottom">Punjaub</a>
 were unveiled, and among their spicy outflowings there gamboled, in Old-world
 freshness of heart, children of a primitive race whom prodigal nature had put
 beyond the necessity of labor.  Through greenest valleys roved pairs of
 Oriental lovers, while above them flashed golden light from the fruit that
 hung in a
 <a href="Notes/n55055.html" target="bottom">Vallambrosa</a>
 of citron-branches.  Distance did not dim either scenery or countenances;
 every living thing was audible and visible in its rejoicing through leagues
 of light and shadow stretched between us.  Again I leaped into the air and
 shouted for joy.
</p><p>
 Along the road that skirted the outside of my Chinese wall a carriage came,
 drawn by a span of richly-caparisoned white horses.  In it a young man and a
 maiden were sitting, and as they drew nearer they bowed to myself and my
 fellow-traveler.  “Who are those?” asked Dan.  “An eminent mandarin of the
 interior,” I replied, “of
 the order of the Blue Button,
 and by name Fuh-chieng, who, with his sister, at this season every year takes
 the tour of the provinces, dispensing justice and examining into the state of
 the public works.  Verily, an estimable youth.  Having known him during the
 summer we spent together at
 <a href="Notes/n52258.html" target="bottom">Pekin</a>,
 I feel constrained to speak with him.”  With a choice compliment on my lips,
 worded in the most courtly Chinese with which I as conversant, I was about to
 rush up the carriage and make my 
 <a href="Notes/n54145.html" target="bottom">kow-tow</a>,
 when my friend, grasping my arm, entreated me to desist, begging to know
 whether I were not aware that, since the year 580 B.C., when
 <a href="Notes/n06728.html" target="bottom">Ching-Chong</a>
 was assassinated in his palanquin, it had been a criminal offense to approach
 within ten paces of a mandarin on his travels.  “My dearest friend,” I
 replied, “you have saved me!  I am astonished at your knowledge of Chinese
 law, this title of which had entirely escaped my mind.  With thankfulness I
 yield to your suggestion, and will suffer the young man to pass on.”  It was
 well that I did so, as my acquaintances in the carriage might otherwise have
 been terrified beyond measure by the singularity, if not by the sublimity of
 the dialect in which I should have addressed them.
</p><p>
 It is possible for a man of imaginative mind, by mere suggestions of rich
 veins of thought, to lead a companion in the hasheesh state through visions
 of incomparable delight.  This fact Dan had discovered in the good grace with
 which I instantly received his advice as to the mandarin.  In our journeying
 we came to a tall gate-post of granite, which stood at the entrance to a lawn
 in front of one of the suburban residences of which I have spoken.  Making
 his manner Oriental, to suit our supposed surroundings, he said to me, “Seest
 thou that tower that rises into the rosy air?”  In an instant I beheld the
 tower with such conviction of reality that I did not even think of it as a
 metamorphose from something else.  From the battlements flaunted yellow flags
 gorgeous with crimson dragons, and over each corner of the turret glared a
 rampant hippogriff, flaming, from his forked tongue even to his anomalous
 tail, with scales of dazzling gold. There was revelry within; its ecstasy
 worded in
 <a href="Notes/n29813.html" target="bottom">Shemitic monosyllables</a>,
 and accompanied by the mellifluous flights of gong and tom-tom.  We passed on
 through Asia.
</p><p>
 We now reached the summit of the hill.  The broadest scope of vision which
 was possible was now ours.  My ecstasy became so great that I seemed to cast
 off all shackles of flesh.  The lover of beauty who should, for the first
 time, drink in the richness of this exalted view through the channels of the
 soul which are ordinarily opened, might well burst forth into singing were
 not reverence the stronger feeling.  But when, with me, that flow of
 loveliness broke in through doors in the spiritual nature to which no
 <a href="Notes/n84759.html" target="bottom">open sesame</a>
 had ever before been granted, I felt, I cried out, “Why need we, in our
 journey, touch the earth at all?  Let us sweep through air above this expanse
 of beauty, and read it like the birds.”
</p><p>
 I was about to fly heavenward, chanting a triumphant hymn, when I turned and
 looked at Dan.  He was standing sorrowfully, without means of flight.  I was
 filled with contrition.  “Dear brother of my pilgrimage,” I said, “did I
 speak of tempting the air, forgetful that thou wast not like unto myself?
 Forgive me — I will not leave thee; yet, oh that thou couldst also fly!
 through what abysses of sublimity would we float!”  Restoring myself to
 contentment with the airy tread of feet which hardly seemed to touch the
 ground, and my wish to oblivion, I again took his arm, and we voyaged as
 before.
</p><p>
 Now we went singing, and I question whether Mozart ever rejoiced in his own
 musical creations as I did in that symphony we sang together.  The tune and
 the words were extemporaneous, yet, by a close sympathy, he sang an accordant
 base to my air, and I heard delicious echoes thrown back from the dome of
 heaven.  We sang the primal simplicity of Asia, the cradle of the nations,
 the grand expectancy of the younger continents, looking eastward to their
 mysterious mother for the gift of races still treasured in her womb.  On our
 pæan were borne the praises of the golden days of
 <a href="Notes/n05407.html" target="bottom">Foh</a>
 and the serene prophecies of Confucius; we spoke of the rivers that for
 numberless centuries bore down to the eternal ocean no freight but the
 <a href="Notes/n22312.html" target="bottom">sere</a>
 leaves of uninhabited wildernesses, whose shadows they
 <a href="Notes/n48163.html" target="bottom">glassed</a>,
 and of fountains upon whose face no smile had rested save that of
 <a href="Notes/n78866.html" target="bottom">Hesper</a>
 and the rising sun.  I lived in what we sang: our music seemed a wondrous
 epic, whose pages we illustrated, not with pictures, but with living groups; 
 the ancient days were restored before my eyes and to my ears, and I exulted
 in the perception with such conviction of reality that I ascribed it to no
 power of my own, but knew it as an exterior and universal fact.
</p><p>
 This will be realized, perhaps, by very few who read my recital.  The word
 for every strange phenomenon with all the world is “only imagination.” Truly,
 this was imagination; but to me, with eyes and ears wide open in the
 daylight, an imagination as real as the soberest fact.
</p><p>
 It will be remembered that the hasheesh states of ecstasy always alternate
 with less intense conditions, in which the prevailing phenomena are those of
 mirth or tranquility.  In accordance with this law, in the present instance,
 Dan, to whom I had told my former experience, was not surprised to hear me
 break forth at the final cadence of our song into a peal of unextinguishable
 laughter, but begged to know what was its cause, that he might laugh too.  I
 could only cry out that my right leg was a tin case filled with stair-rods, 
 and as I limped along, keeping that member perfectly rigid, both from fear of
 cracking the metal and the difficulty of bending it, I heard he rattle of the
 brazen contents shaken from side to side with feelings of the most supreme
 absurdity possible to the human soul.  Presently the leg was restored to its
 former state, but in the interim its mate had grown to a size which would
 have made it a very respectable trotter for
 <a href="Notes/n49857.html" target="bottom">Brian Borru</a>
 or one of
 <a href="Notes/n02806.html" target="bottom">the Titans</a>.
 Elevated
 <a href="Notes/n69443.html" target="bottom">some few hundred feet</a>
 into the firmament, I was compelled to hop
 upon my giant pedestal in a way very ungraceful in a world where two legs
 were the fashion, and eminently disagreeable to the slighted member, which
 sought in vain to reach the earth with struggles amusing from their very
 insignificance.  This ludicrous affliction being gradually removed, I went on
 my way quietly until we again began to be surrounded by the houses of the
 town.
</p><p>
 Here the phenomenon of the dual existence once more presented itself. One
 part of me awoke, while the other continued in perfect hallucination. The
 awakened portion felt the necessity of keeping in side streets on the way
 home, lest some untimely burst of ecstasy should startle more frequented
 thoroughfares.  I mentioned this to Dan, who drew me into a quiet lane, by
 the side of which we sat down together to rest on a broad stone.  By this
 time the sunset had nearly faded, while my attention was directed to other 
 things, and its regency of all the beauties of the sky was replaced by that
 of the full moon, now at the zenith.  A broad and clearly-defined halo
 surrounded her, and refracted her rays in such a manner as to shower them
 from its edge in a prismatic fringe.  That vision of loveliness was the only 
 possible one which could have recompensed me for the loss of my sunset.  I
 gazed heavenward, as one fascinated by mystical eyes.  And now the broad
 luminous belt began to be peopled with myriads of shining ones from the realm
 of Faëry who plunged into the translucent lake of ether as into a sea,
 and dashing back its silvery spray from their breasts, swam to the moon and
 ascended its gleaming beach.
</p><p>
 Between this moon-island and the shore of halo now growing multitudes
 endlessly passed and repassed, and I could hear, tinkling down through the
 vacant spaces, the thrill of their gnome-laughter.  I could have kept that
 stony seat all night, and looked speechlessly into heaven, unmoved though an
 armed host had passed by me on the earth, but unconsciously I closed my eyes,
 and was in a moment whirling on through a visionary dance, like that in which
 I had been borne as soon as I lay down at the time of my first experiment.
 Temples and gardens, pyramids and unearthly rivers, began to float along
 before the windows of my sense, when Dan, looking around, saw that I would
 become unconscious, and aroused me.  Again we walked on.
</p><p>
 And now that unutterable thirst which characterizes hasheesh came upon me.  I
 could have lain me down and lapped dew from the grass.  I must drink,
 wheresoever, howsoever.  We soon reached home — soon, because it was not five
 squares off from where we sat down, yet ages, from the thirst which consumed
 me and the expansion of time in which I lived.  I came into the house as one
 would approach a fountain in the desert, with a wild bound of exultation, and
 gazed with miserly eyes at the draught which my friend poured out for me
 until the glass was brimming.  I clutched it — I put it to my lips.  Ha! a
 surprise!  It was not water, but the most delicious
 <a href="Notes/n98955.html" target="bottom">metheglin</a>
 in which ever bard of the
 <a href="Notes/n83529.html" target="bottom">Cymri</a>
 drank the health of
 <a href="Notes/n86415.html" target="bottom">Howell Dda</a>.
 It danced and sparkled like some liquid
 <a href="Notes/n99312.html" target="bottom">metempsychosis</a>
 of amber; it gleamed
 with the spiritual fire of a thousand chrysolites.  To sight, to taste it was
 metheglin, such as never mantled in the cups of Valhalla.
</p><p>
 The remainder of the evening I spent in a delirium which, unlike all that had
 preceded it, was one of unutterable calm.  Not the heavy sleep of a debauch,
 not the voluntary musing of the visionary, but a clarifying of all thought, 
 and the lowing in of the richest influences from the world around me, without
 the toil of selecting them.  I looked at the stars, and felt kindred with
 them; I spoke to them, and they answered me.  I dwelt in an inner communion
 with heaven — a communion where every language is understood, rather where
 all speak the same language, and deeply did I realize a voice which seemed to
 say, as in my waking dreams I had faintly heard in murmur upon earth,</p>
<center>
<a href="Notes/n81036.html" target="bottom">Πολλαὶ μὲν θνητοίς γλῶτται, μια δἀθάνατοισιν</a>
</center>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>V. The Hour and the Power of Darkness</h2>
<p>
 It may perhaps be not altogether a fanciful classification to divide every
 man’s life into two periods, the locomotive and the static.  Restless
 fluidity always characterizes the childish mind in its healthy state,
 exemplifying itself in the thousand wayward freaks, hair-breadth experiments,
 and unanswerable questions which keep the elder portions of a family in
 continual oscillation between mirth and terror.  There is not always a
 thorough solidification of the mental nature, even when the great boy has
 learned what to do with his hands, and how to occupy his station at maturer
 tea-parties with becoming dignity and resignation.  No longer, to be sure,
 does he gratify experimental tendencies by taking the eight-day clock to
 pieces to look at its machinery; no longer does he nonplus grave aunts and 
 grandmothers with questions upon the causes of his own origination, but the
 same dynamic propensities exist expanded into a larger and more
 self-conscious sphere.  His restlessness of limb has now become the desire of
 travel, his investigation into the petty matters of household economy has
 grown into a thirst for research whose field is the world and whose
 instruments are the highest faculties of induction.
</p><p>
 With some men this state remains unchanged through a long life, but to most
 of us there comes, sooner or later, a period when the longing for change dies
 out, and a fixed place and an unalterable condition become the great central
 ideas of existence.  We look back with a wonder that is almost
 incredulousness upon the time when a ride by railway was the dream of weeks
 preceding, and try in vain to realize the supernatural freshness which the
 earth put on when for the first time we discovered that we were near-sighted,
 and looked through some friend’s spectacles.  Motion, except for the rare
 purpose of recreation, becomes an annoyance to us beyond a circumscribed
 territory, and we have emerged into the static condition of life before we
 are aware.
</p><p>
 Much earlier than the usual period did this become the case with me.  A
 feeble childhood soon exhausted its superfluous activities, and into books,
 ill health, and musing I settled down when I should have been playing
 cricket, hunting, or riding.  The younger thirst for adventure was quenched
 by rapid degrees as I found it possible
 <a href="Notes/n77705.html" target="bottom">to ascend Chimborazo with
 Humboldt</a> lying on a sofa, or chase harte-beests with 
 <a href="Notes/n78885.html" target="bottom">Cumming</a>
 over muffins and coffee.  The only exceptions to this state of imaginative
 indolence were the hours spent in rowing or sailing upon the most glorious
 river of the world, and the consciousness that the Hudson rolled at my own
 door only contributed to settle the conviction that there was no need of
 going abroad to find beauties in which the soul might wrap itself as in a
 garment of delight.  Even at these seasons exercise was not so much the aim
 as musing. Many a time, with the handles of my sculls thrust under the
 side-girders, and the blades turned full to the wind, have I sat and drifted
 for hours through mountain-shadows, and past glimpses of light that flooded
 the woody gorges, with a sense of dreamy ecstasy which all the novelties of a
 new world could never have supplied.
</p><p>
 Oh, most noble river, what hast thou not been to me?  In childhood thy
 ripples were the playmates of my perpetual leisure, dancing up the sandy
 stretches of thy brink, and telling laughing tales of life’s beamy spray and
 sunshine.  In after years, the grand prophet of a wider life, thine ebb sang
 chants to the imperial ocean, into whose pearly palaces thou wast hastening,
 and thy flood brought up the resounding history of the infinite surges whence
 thou hadst returned.  It is not thine to come stealing from unnamed fountains
 of mystery, nor to crown thy sublime mountains with the ruined battlements of
 a departed age; but more than Nile hath.  God glorified thee, and Nature hath
 hallowed thy walls with her own armorial bearings till thou art more reverend
 than Rhine.  On thy guarding peaks Antiquity sits enthroned, asking no
 register in the crumbling monuments of man, but bearing her original sceptre
 from the hand of Him who first founded her domain beside thy immortal flow.
</p><p>
 Gradually the Hudson came to supply all my spiritual wants.  Were I sad, I
 found sympathy in the almost human murmurs of his waters, as, stretched upon
 the edge of some rocky headland, I heard them go beating into the narrow
 caves beneath me, and return sighing, as if defrauded of a hiding-place and a
 home.  Were I merry, the white-caps danced and laughed about my prancing
 boat, and the wind whistled rollicking glees against my stays.  In weariness,
 I leaped into the stream; his cool hand upbore and caressed me till I
 returned braced for thought, and renewed as by a plunge into
 <a href="Notes/n54438.html" target="bottom">El Dorado</a>.
 In the Hudson I found a wealth which satisfied all wishes, and my supreme
 hope was that on his banks I might pass all my life.  Thus supplied with
 beauty, consolation, dreams, all things, every day I became more and more
 careless of the world beyond, and in my frame grew even <em>hyperstatic</em>.
</p><p>
 It was in this state that hasheesh found me.  After the walk which I last
 recorded, the former passion for travel returned with powerful intensity.  I
 had now a way of gratifying it which comported both with indolence and
 economy.  The whole East, from Greece to farthest China, lay within the
 compass of a township; no outlay was necessary for the journey. For the
 humble sum of six cents I might purchase an excursion ticket over all the
 earth; ships and dromedaries, tents and hospices were
 <a href="Notes/n35732.html" target="bottom">all contained in a box of
 Tilden’s extract</a>.
 Hasheesh I called the “drug of travel,” and I had only to direct my thoughts
 strongly toward a particular part of the world previously to swallowing my
 bolus to make my whole fantasia in the strongest possible degree
 topographical.  Or, when the delirium was at its height, let any one suggest
 to me, however faintly, mountain, wilderness, or market-place, and 
 straightway I was in it, drinking in the novelty of my surroundings in all
 the ecstasy of a discoverer.  I swam up against the current of all time; I
 walked through Luxor and Palmyra as they were of old;
 <a href="Notes/n59645.html" target="bottom">on Babylon the bittern had not
 built her nest</a>, and I gazed on the unbroken columns of the Parthenon.
</p><p>
 Soon after my pedestrian journey through Asia I changed my residence for a
 while, and went to live in the town of Schenectady.  It was here that the
 remainder of my hasheesh-life was passed, and here, for many days, did I 
 drain alternately cups of superhuman joy and superhuman misery.  At Union
 College, of which I was a resident, I had a few friends to whom I
 communicated my acquaintance with the wondrous drug which was now becoming a
 habit with me.  Some of them were surprised, some warned me, and as they will 
 most of them be introduced into the narrative which I am writing, I now
 mention them thus particularly, lest it may be thought strange that, in an
 ordinary town of small size, there should be found by one man a sufficient
 number of congenial persons to vary the
 <a href="Notes/n75655.html" target="bottom">dramatis personæ</a>
 of a story as mine will be varied.
</p><p>
 Having exhausted the supply of hasheesh which I had originally obtained from
 the shelves of my old lounging-place at the shop of the doctor, I procured a
 small jar of a preparation of the same drug by another chemist, which, I was
 told, was much weaker than the former.  Late in the evening I took about
 <a href="Notes/n16208.html" target="bottom">fifty grains</a> of the new
 preparation, arguing that this amount was a rational equivalent for the
 <a href="Notes/n49808.html" target="bottom">thirty</a>
 which had before been my maximum dose.
</p><p>
 It is impossible, however, to base any calculation of the energy of hasheesh
 upon such a comparison.  The vital forces upon which this most magical
 stimulant operates are too delicate, too recondite to be treated like material
 parts in a piece of mechanism whose power of resistance can be definitely
 expressed by an equation.  There are certain nerves, no doubt, which the
 anatomist and the physician will find affected by the cannabine influence —
 certain functions over which its essence appears to hold peculiar regency;
 but we must have proceeded much farther in the science which treats of the
 connection between matter and mind, must know much more of those imponderable
 forces which, more delicate than electricity and more mysterious than the
 magnetic fluid, weave the delicate interacting network that joins our human
 duality, before we can treat that part of us affected by hasheesh as a
 constant in any calculation.
</p><p>
 There are two facts which I have verified as universal by repeated
 experiment, which fall into their place here as aptly as they can in the
 course of my narrative:  1st.  At two different times, when body and mind are
 apparently in precisely analogous states, when all circumstances, exterior
 and interior, do not differ tangibly in the smallest respect, the same dose
 of the same preparation of hasheesh will frequently produce diametrically
 opposite effects.  Still further, I have taken at one time a pill of
 <a href="Notes/n49808.html" target="bottom">thirty grains</a>,
 which hardly gave a perceptible phenomenon, and at another, when my dose had
 been but
 <a href="Notes/n71863.html" target="bottom">half that quantity</a>,
 I have suffered the agonies of a martyr, or rejoiced in a perfect phrensy.
 So exceedingly variable are its results, that, long before I abandoned the
 indulgence, I took each successive bolus with the consciousness that I was
 daring an uncertainty as tremendous as the equipoise between hell and
 heaven.  Yet the fascination employed Hope as its advocate, and won the
 suit.  2d.  If, during the ecstasy of hasheesh delirium, another dose,
 however small — yes, though it be no larger than half a pea — be employed to
 prolong the condition, such agony will inevitably ensue as will make the soul
 shudder at its own possibility of endurance without annihilation.  By
 repeated experiments, which now occupy the most horrible place upon my
 catalogue of horrible remembrances, have I proved that, among all the
 variable phenomena of hasheesh, this alone stands unvarying.  The use of it
 directly after any other stimulus will produce consequences as appalling.
</p><p>
 But to return from my digression.  It was perhaps eight o’clock in the
 evening when I took the dose of
 <a href="Notes/n16208.html" target="bottom">fifty grains</a>.  
 I did not retire until near midnight, and as no effects had then manifested
 themselves, I supposed that the preparation was even weaker than my ratio
 gave it credit for being, and, without any expectation of result, lay down to
 sleep.  Previously, however, I extinguished my light.  To say this may seem
 trivial, but it is as important a matter as any which it is possible to
 notice.  The most direful suggestions of the bottomless pit may flow in upon
 the hasheesh-eater through the very medium of darkness.  The blowing out of a
 candle can set an unfathomed
 <a href="Notes/n68307.html" target="bottom">barathrum</a>
 wide agape beneath the flower-wreathed table of his feast, and convert his
 palace of sorcery into a
 <a href="Notes/n41137.html" target="bottom">Golgotha</a>.
 Light is a necessity to him, even when sleeping; it must tinge his visions,
 or they assume a hue as sombre as the banks of
 <a href="Notes/n06875.html" target="bottom">Styx</a>.
</p><p>
 I do not know how long a time had passed since midnight, when I awoke
 suddenly to find myself in a realm of the most perfect clarity of view, yet
 terrible with an infinitude of demoniac shadows.  Perhaps, I thought, I am
 still dreaming; but no effort could arouse me from my vision, and I realized 
 that I was wide awake.  Yet it was an awakening which, for torture, had no
 parallel in all the stupendous domain of sleeping incubus.  Beside my bed in
 the centre of the room stood a bier, from whose corners drooped the folds of
 a heavy pall; outstretched upon it lay in state a most fearful corpse, whose
 livid face was distorted with the pangs of assassination.  The traces of a
 great agony were frozen into fixedness in the tense position of every muscle,
 and the nails of the dead man’s fingers pierced his palms with the desperate
 clinch of one who has yielded not without agonizing resistance. Two tapers at
 his head, two at his feet, with their tall and unsnuffed wicks, made the
 ghastliness of the bier more luminously unearthly, and a smothered laugh of
 derision from some invisible watcher ever and anon mocked the corpse, as if
 triumphant demons were exulting over their prey.  I pressed my hands upon my
 eyeballs till they ached, in intensity of desire to shut out the spectacle; I
 buried my head in the pillow, that I might not hear that awful laugh of
 diabolic sarcasm
</p><p>
 But — oh horror immeasurable! I beheld the walls of the room slowly gliding
 together, the ceiling coming down, the floor ascending, as of the lonely
 captive saw them, whose cell was doomed to be his coffin.  Nearer and nearer
 am I borne toward the corpse.  I shrunk back from the edge of the bed; I
 cowered in most abject fear.  I tried to cry out, but speech was paralyzed.
 The walls came closer and closer together.  Presently my hand lay on the dead
 man’s forehead.  I made my arm as straight and rigid as a bar of iron; but of
 what avail was human strength against the contraction of that cruel masonry?
 Slowly my elbow bent with the ponderous pressure; nearer grew the ceiling — I
 fell into the fearful embrace of death.  I was pent, I was stifled in the
 breathless niche, which was all of space still left to me.  The stony eyes
 stared up into my own, and again the maddening peal of fiendish laughter rang
 close beside my ear.  Now I was touched on all sides by the walls of the
 terrible press; there came a heavy crush, and I felt all sense blotted out in
 darkness.
</p><p>
 I awaked at last; the corpse was gone, but I had taken his place upon the
 bier.  In the same attitude which he had kept I lay motionless, conscious,
 although in darkness, that I wore upon my face the counterpart of his look of
 agony.  The room had grown into a gigantic hall, whose roof was framed of
 iron arches; the pavement, the walls, the cornice were all of iron.  The
 spiritual essence of the metal seemed to be a combination of cruelty and
 despair.  It’s massive hardness spoke a language which it is impossible to
 embody in words, but any one who has watched the relentless sweep of some
 great engine crank, and realized its capacity for murder, will catch a
 glimpse, even in the memory, of the thrill which seemed to say, “This iron is
 a tearless fiend,” of the unutterable meaning I saw in those colossal beams
 and buttresses.  I suffered from the vision of that iron as from the presence
 of a giant assassin.
</p><p>
 But my senses opened slowly to the perception of still worse presences.  By
 my side there gradually emerged from the sulphureous twilight which bathed
 the room the most horrible form which the soul could look upon unshattered —
 a fiend also of iron, white hot and dazzling with the glory of the nether
 <a href="Notes/n67468.html" target="bottom">penetralia</a>.  A face that was the ferreous incarnation of all imaginations of
 malice and irony looked on me with a glare, withering from its intense heat,
 but still more from the unconceived degree of inner wickedness which it
 symbolized.  I realized whose laughter I had heard, and instantly I heard it
 again.  Beside him another demon, his very twin, was rocking a tremendous
 cradle framed of bars of iron like all things else, and candescent with as
 fierce a heat as the fiend’s.
</p><p>
 And now, in a chant of the most terrific blasphemy which it is possible to
 imagine, or rather of blasphemy so fearful that no human thought has ever
 conceived of it, both the demons broke forth, until I grew intensely wicked
 merely by hearing it.  I still remember the meaning of the song, although
 there is no language yet coined which will convey it, and far be it from me
 even to suggest its nature, lest I should seem to perpetuate in any degree
 such profanity as beyond the abodes of the lost no lips are capable of
 uttering.  Every note of the music itself accorded with the thought as symbol
 represents essence, and with its clangor mixed the maddening creak of the
 forever-oscillating cradle, until I felt driven into a ferocious despair.
 Suddenly the nearest fiend, snatching up a pitchfork (also of white-hot
 iron), thrust it into my writhing side, and hurled me shrieking into the
 fiery cradle.  I sought in my torture to scale the bars; they slipped from my
 grasp and under my feet like the smoothest icicles.  Through increasing
 grades of agony I lay unconsumed, tossing from side to side with the rocking
 of the dreadful engine, and still above me pealed the chant of blasphemy, and
 the eyes of demoniac sarcasm smiled at me in mockery of a mother’s gaze upon
 her child.
</p><p>
 “Let us sing him,” said one of the fiends to the other, “the lullaby of
 Hell.”  The blasphemy now changed into an awful word-picturing of eternity,
 unveiling what it was, and dwelling with raptures of malice upon its
 infinitude, its sublimity of growing pain, and its privation of all fixed
 points which might mark it into divisions.  By emblems common to all language
 rather than by any vocal words, did they sing this frightful apocalypse, yet
 the very emblems had a sound as distinct as tongue could give them.  This was
 one, and the only one of their representatives that I can remember.  Slowly
 they began, “To-day is father of to-morrow, to-morrow hath a son that shall
 beget the day succeeding.”  With increasing rapidity they sang in this way,
 day by day, the genealogy of a thousand years, and I traced on the successive
 generations, without a break in one link, until the rush of their procession
 reached a rapidity so awful as fully to typify eternity itself; and still I
 fled on through that burning genesis of cycles. I feel that I do not convey
 my meaning, but may no one else ever understand it better!
</p><p>
 Withered like a leaf in the breath of an oven, after millions of years I felt
 myself tossed upon the iron floor.  The fiends had departed, the cradle was
 gone.  I stood alone, staring into immense and empty spaces. Presently I
 found that I was in a colossal square, as of some European city, alone at the
 time of evening twilight, and surrounded by houses hundreds of stories high.
 I was bitterly athirst.  I ran to the middle of the square, and reached it
 after an infinity of travel.  There was a fountain carved in iron, every jet
 inimitably sculptured in mockery of water, yet dry as the ashes of a furnace.
 “I shall perish with thirst,” I cried.  “Yet one more trial.  There must be
 people in all these immense houses.  Doubtless they love the dying traveler,
 and will give him to drink.  Good friends! water! water!”  A horribly
 deafening din poured on me from the four sides of the square.  Every sash of
 all the hundred stories of every house in that colossal quadrangle flew up as
 by one spring.  Awakened by my call, at every window stood a terrific
 maniac.  Sublimely in the air above me, in front, beside me, on either hand,
 and behind my back, a wilderness of insane faces gnashed at me, glared,
 gibbered, howled, laughed horribly, hissed and cursed.  At the unbearable
 sight I myself became insane, and, leaping up and down, mimicked them all,
 and drank their demented spirit.
</p><p>
 A hand seized my arm — a voice called my name.  The square grew lighter — it
 changed — it slowly took a familiar aspect, and gradually I became aware that
 my room-mate was standing before me with a lighted lamp. I sank back into his 
 arms, crying “Water! water,
 <a href="Notes/n47028.html" target="bottom">Robert</a>!
 For the love of heaven, water!”  He passed across the room to the wash-stand, 
 leaving me upon the bed, where I afterward found he had replaced me on being
 awakened by hearing me leap frantically up and down upon the floor.  In going
 for the water, he seemed to be traveling over a desert plain to some far-off 
 spring, and I hailed him on his return with the pitcher and the glass as one
 greets his friend restored after a long journey.  No glass for me!  I
 snatched the pitcher, and drank a Niagara of refreshment with every draught.
 I reveled in the ecstasy of a drinker of the rivers of
 <a href="Notes/n17449.html" target="bottom">Al Ferdoos</a>.
</p><p>
 Hasheesh always brings with it an awakening of perception which magnifies the
 smallest sensation till it occupies immense boundaries.  The hasheesh-eater
 who drinks during his highest state of exaltation almost invariably supposes
 that he is swallowing interminable floods, and imagines his throat an abyss
 which is becoming gorged by the sea.  Repeatedly, as in an agony of thirst I
 have clutched some small vessel of water and tipped it at my lips, I have
 felt such a realization of an overwhelming torrent that, with my throat still
 charred, I have put the water away, lest I should be drowned by the flow.
</p><p>
 With the relighting of the lamp my terrors ceased.  The room was still
 immense, yet the iron of its structure, in the
 <a href="Notes/n80335.html" target="bottom">alembic</a>
 of that heavenly light, had been transmuted into silver and gold.  Beamy
 spars, chased by some unearthly graver, supported the roof above me, and a
 mellow glory transfused me, shed from sunny panels that covered the walls.
 Out of this hall of
 <a href="Notes/n43188.html" target="bottom">grammarye</a>
 I suddenly passed through a crystal gate, and found myself again in the world 
 outside.  Through a valley carpeted with roses I marched proudly at the head
 of a grand army, and the most triumphant music pealed from all my legions.
 In the symphony joined many an unutterable instrument, bugles and
 <a href="Notes/n96994.html" target="bottom">ophicleides</a>,
 harps and cymbals, whose wondrous peals seemed to say, “We are
 self-conscious; we exult like human souls”.  There were roses every where —
 roses under foot, roses festooning the lattices at our sides, roses showering
 a prodigal flush of beauty from the arches of an arbor overhead.  Down the
 valley I gained glimpses of dreamy lawns basking in a
 <a href="Notes/n21615.html" target="bottom">Claude Lorraine</a>
 sunlight.  Over them multitudes of rosy children came leaping to throw
 garlands on my victorious road, and singing pæans to me with the voices
 of cherubs.  Nations that my sword had saved ran bounding through the flowery 
 walls of my avenue to cry “Our hero — our savior,” and prostrate themselves
 at my feet.  I grew colossal in a delirium of pride.  I felt myself the
 centre of all the world’s immortal glory.  As once before the ecstasy of
 music had borne me from the body, so now I floated out of it in the intensity
 of my triumph.  As the last cord was dissolved, I saw all the attendant
 splendors of my march fade away, and became once more conscious of my room
 restored to its natural state.
</p><p>
 Not a single hallucination remained.  Surrounding objects resumed their
 wonted look, yet a wonderful surprise broke in upon me.  In the course of my
 delirium, the soul, I plainly discovered, had indeed departed from the body.
 I was that soul utterly divorced from the corporeal nature, disjoined,
 clarified, purified.  From the air in which I hovered I looked down upon my
 former receptacle.  Animal life, with all its processes, still continued to
 go on; the chest heaved with the regular rise and fall of breathing, the
 temples throbbed, and the cheek flushed.  I scrutinized the body with
 wonderment; it seemed no more to concern me than that of another being.  I do
 not remember, in the course of the whole experience I have had of hasheesh, a
 more singular emotion than I felt at that moment.  The spirit discerned
 itself as possessed of all the human capacities, intellect, susceptibility,
 and will — saw itself complete in every respect; yet, like a grand motor, it
 had abandoned the machine which it once energized, and in perfect
 independence stood apart.  In the prerogative of my spiritual nature I was
 restrained by no objects of a denser class.  To myself I was visible and
 tangible, yet I knew that no material eyes could see me.  Through the walls
 of the room I was able to pass and repass, and through the ceiling to behold
 the stars unobscured.  This was neither hallucination nor dream.  The sight
 of my reason was preternaturally intense, and I remembered that this was one
 of the states which frequently occur to men immediately before their death
 has become apparent to lookers-on, and also in the more remarkable conditions
 of trance.  That such a state is possible is incontestably proved by many
 cases on record in which it has fallen under the observation of students most
 eminent in physico-psychical science.
</p><p>
 A voice of command called on me to return into the body, saying in the midst
 of my exultation over what I thought was my final disenfranchisement from the
 corporeal, “The time is not yet.”  I returned, and again felt the animal
 nature joined to me by its mysterious threads of conduction.  Once more soul
 and body were one.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2> VI. The Mysteries of the Life-sign Gemini </h2>
<p>
 In this vision the conception of our human duality was presented to me in a
 manner more striking than ever before.  Hitherto it had been more a
 suggestion than a proof; now it appeared in the light of an intuition.  A
 wonderful field of questions is opened by such an experience, and I am
 constrained to sketch a few of them as they have occurred to myself.
</p><p>
 1st.  Are the animal and spiritual conjoint parts of the same life, or two
 different lives which intensely interact, yet are not altogether dependent
 upon each other for their continuance?
</p><p>
 That the soul is dependent upon aught that we call material for the
 preservation of its highest functions, very few men will feel disposed to
 assert.  Yet we are all exceedingly loth to concede that the animal has a
 distinct life of its own, which, for some time after the dissolution of the
 ties which bind it to the spiritual, might continue to throb on unimpaired.
 Your critic, who aims altogether at uses comprehended in bread, meat, and
 broad-cloth, may ask, “If it be so, of what practical utility would it be to
 discover it?”  A sufficient answer lies in the fact that men would know one
 more truth.  A truth tested and established may lie for centuries, mildewed
 and rusted, in the armory of knowledge, until some great soul comes along,
 draws it out of the rubbish, buckles it on, rushes into the conflict, and
 with it pries open the portals of one more promised land of blessing for the
 human race.  Gunpowder is a truth; wise men sneer at the monk’s obstreperous
 plaything.  The years float calmly on; that plaything strikes the cliffs of
 Dover, and as they go toppling down to leave a highway for the nations,
 contemned truth vindicates her uses with a triumphant voice of thunder.
</p><p>
 But there is also a tangible utility in this discovery of an independent
 animal life (supposing it to be made) which arises out of the fact that we
 should thus possess much higher notions of the spiritual than we have at
 present.  In the desire to make the body entirely dependent on the soul for
 all its processes, we have linked the two in so close a marriage that the
 soul itself has become materialized by contact in our conceptions.  What we
 call spirit is, after all, when its vague and variable boundaries are
 somewhat accurately drawn, nothing but an exceedingly rarefied mist, capable,
 to be sure, of self-conscious phenomena, but nevertheless subject to most of
 the conditions of matter.  We grant, indeed, that after death the interior
 eyes may see without the mediation of our present lens and retina, but scout
 the idea that those eyes, in this world, ever employ a power which, after a
 few years, they shall keep in constant activity forever.  Now, if we can more
 definitely mark the line between the spiritual and the animal as between two 
 independent lives hinged on each other, yet not interpenetrating, we shall
 have done much to glorify the soul and reinstate it in its proper reverence.
</p><p>
 Not to assert the separate of the animal life as proven, let us look at some
 singular phenomena which, by such an hypothesis, would be explained, and (as
 it seems to me) by such a one only.
</p><p>
 1st. In surgical operations performed while the patient lay under the
 influence of an anæsthetic, as chloroform or ether, I have witnessed
 contortions of the whole muscular system, and heard outcries so fearful that
 it was impossible to persuade the lookers-on that the application of the
 instrument was not causing the severest agony.  Upon one occasion I myself
 stood by a man who was to suffer a difficult dental operation, and with my
 own hands administered chloroform to him.  All the usual symptoms of complete
 anæsthesia ensuing, I signaled the dentist to begin his work.  The
 moment that the instrument came into successful operation, the patient
 uttered a harrowing cry of pain and struggled convulsively, at the same time
 entreating the operator to stop.  I was persuaded, from former cases of a
 similar nature, that the man had no consciousness of pain, and so advised the
 dentist.  From motives of humanity, however, the latter desisted when his
 work was but partly accomplished, and, having extracted a single tooth
 instead of the several which were to be drawn, permitted the seeming sufferer
 to return to his natural state.  He presently awoke, as from a dream; and on
 being asked whether he endured great torture, he laughed at the idea, denying
 that he had even been aware of the application of the forceps, although fully
 self-conscious internally during the whole effect of the anæsthetic.
</p><p>
 I believe I am only stating one of many cases which fall under the almost
 daily observation of men of wide experience in the surgical profession.
 Although far from being an expert myself, I have been an eye-witness to two
 such instances.
</p><p>
 Now what is it, or who is it that is suffering tortures so great that the
 face, the lips, the limbs must give vent to them in such intensity of
 expression?  The soul has been all the time lying in a delicious calm of
 meditation, or gliding through a succession of strange images, whose order
 was not once broken by the thrill of pain.  It frequently remembers its
 visions, and can repeat them coherently; it would certainly have recollected,
 if it had ever known them, some traits of an experience so utterly discordant
 as suffering.
</p><p>
 An inference directly suggests itself.  Where all the outer phenomena of
 torture have been witnessed, the anæsthetic has not so much affected
 the body as the ties which unite it with the soul.  A temporary disjunction
 has taken place between the two, and the animal nature has been suffering
 while the spiritual, completely insulated, was left to its own free activity.
</p><p>
 2d. I believe it is gradually becoming conceded that the agonies which
 universal belief once attached to the idea of death are rather imaginary than
 real.  Yet the hour of dissolution is almost invariably accompanied by groans
 and contortions, which tell tales of the bitter pang felt somewhere in the
 depths of that mysterious being which is becoming disjoined.  While the dying
 man, if still fully conscious, frequently asserts that he is in ecstasy
 beyond compare, tense muscles and writhing limbs are telling another story.
 What is it that is suffering?
</p><p>
 3d.  There have been instances of the trance state which throw an additional
 light upon this question, or involve it in deeper mystery, according to the
 mental temperament of the man who considers them.  It is needless to quote
 <a href="Notes/n60846.html" target="bottom">the case of Tennant</a>
 in our own country, and many cataleptic and hypnotic states which have fallen
 under private notice, when an argument <em>à fortiori</em> may be
 drawn from the remarkable phenomena which but a few years ago transpired
 under the eye-witness of many eminent men of the medical and other
 professions in India.<a href="Notes/aNoteA.html" target="bottom">*</a>  So important a
 field of inquiry did these phenomena seem to open, that
 <a href="Notes/n81948.html" target="bottom">Dr. Braid, of Edinburgh</a>, 
 a physician of considerable fame, made it the groundwork of a book,
 condensed, yet valuable for its research, upon the trance condition, and the
 scientific mind throughout Great Britain took a lively interest in the
 subject.  A
 <a href="Notes/n61935.html" target="bottom">fakeer</a>
 presented himself at one of
 the Company’s
 stations, and proffered the singular request that he might be buried alive.
 Though not much astonished at any possible petition coming from one of an
 order of men so wildly fanatic as those who infest India with their monstrous
 devotions and insatiable alms-begging, the servants of the Company still
 treated him as insane, and answered his request with corresponding neglect.
 Still, the fakeer insisted upon their compliance, asserting that he possessed
 the power of separating soul and body at will, and was able to live without
 air or food for the space of thirty days.  Upon his producing native
 witnesses who fully corroborated his statement, he obtained a more
 deferential attention to his demand.  As his reason for asking sepulture, he
 stated the desire for a more complete abstraction of soul than he could
 attain above ground and among the things of sense, positively assuring his
 questioners that this abstraction, as he had tested by repeated experiments,
 was in no danger of proving fatal to the body.
</p><p>
 At last, then, his petition was granted.  By an effort of will he threw
 himself into the ecstatic or trance state, and when the vital processes had
 become absolutely imperceptible, and he lay to all appearance dead, he was
 closely wrapped in a winding-sheet, and, for fear of imposition, buried in a
 tightly-masoned tomb.  The opening was then filled with earth, and the mound
 thus raised above him thickly sown with barley.  A Mohammedan guard (the last 
 in the world which would be likely to connive at the cheat of
 <a href="Notes/n48864.html" target="bottom">a disciple of Brahm</a>)
 was stationed about the grave night and day.  The barley grew up undisturbed
 till the month was accomplished, and, at the expiration of that time,
 hundreds of people thronged to be present at the disentombing of the fakeer.
 Among them were grave men, men of calm and scientific minds, and many utterly
 incredulous of the possibility that human life could have been sustained from
 inner sources through so long a period.  Every test was thus present which
 could make evidence of any fact conclusive beyond doubt.
</p><p>
 The body of the fakeer was found unaltered by decay, yet shriveled to a
 mummy.  Means of restoration were used very similar to those employed in
 bringing a cataleptic patient to consciousness.  Presently the seemingly dead
 man began to breathe, his color returned, and before the close of the day, as
 the nutriment which was given him was assimilated, all his functions were in
 their ordinary activity.
</p><p>
 A more complete separation of the animal and spiritual probably never existed
 without death, yet the two lives, through the whole period of sepulture, were
 sustained apart without the slightest consciousness in the soul that the body
 was growing emaciated, convulsed, and juiceless.  Many of the eye-witnesses
 to this wonderful experiment are living to the present day.
</p><p>
 Upon the theory of these independent existences it may be asked, “How is
 death possible at all to the animal?”  We reply, In most cases, doubt-less,
 the animal dies first, and the spiritual deserts it afterward; but, wherever
 the spiritual is the more powerfully agonized of the two, in the very shock
 of its exertions to depart it may bear the animal away with it, which, not
 being immortal, has no possible residence outside of the body, but instantly
 perishes.  Yet when, as by the gentle disentanglement of patient fingers, the
 ligaments of the corporeal life are unwound from about the soul, the latter,
 undestroyed, may still remain through its allotted day of endurance.  If this
 be more than mere visionary conjecture, it accounts for the unchanged
 appearance of bodies disentombed after a hundred years, and the relics
 unconsumed by time, which, in the world’s reaction from hyper-credulity, we
 have so long been apt to classify with the other legends of the
 <a href="Notes/n11616.html" target="bottom"><i>Vita Sanctorum</i></a>.
</p><p>
 2. Another question suggested by the experience of my own duality is this:
 If the two existences are independent, may not the fact account for that
 blind feeling which almost every man has experienced, that he has lived
 previously to his present form in other and entirely different states?  The
 idea of the
 <a href="Notes/n99312.html" target="bottom">metempsychosis</a>
 was never, indeed, made the central one of any
 system of philosophy until the time of Pythagoras.  He was the first of whom
 we have historic mention to scale off from the original gem the
 <a href="Notes/n68583.html" target="bottom">laminæ</a>
 of grosser Egyptian and Indian fable, which covered it like a later deposit
 (and he had reasons for doing so, which we think will be proved, to a strong
 probability at least, in a future portion of this narrative); yet, after all, 
 metempsychosis, as a fact, has been dimly felt by universal humanity, and
 even at the present day presents itself at times so strongly to many a mind
 as almost to carry the conviction of an intuition.
</p><p>
 But, upon our hypothesis, can the idea be accounted for?  Let us see.
</p><p>
 Except in the prerogative of the peculiar quality of that life which animates
 it, the body has no more claims to reverence than the same number of pounds
 of alkali, water, iron, and other chemicals composing it, in any other form.
</p><p>
 But for the energizing, vital element of the particular rank in the scale of
 vitality which energizes man, he would be worthy of quite as much
 consideration were he sealed up in
 <a href="Notes/n28458.html" target="bottom">carboys</a>,
 poured into pitchers, blown into bladders, and tied up in brown paper
 parcels.  His body has not the faintest stamp of originality.  As bovine
 muscle he existed long ago in the food which nourished his parents; still
 farther back he was eaten by an ox in the form of some succulent weed of the
 pasture, and that very weed educed him from the soil through microscopic
 tubes by capillary attraction.  Wash this soil, and he will be deposited in
 the form of a precipitate; yet after all this investigation of his material
 genealogy, we have only arrived at
 <a href="Notes/n91958.html" target="bottom">the same result</a>
 which could be attained by any skillful chemist who would undergo the labor
 of taking him to pieces in his present state, and subject him to adequate
 tests.  The man of visionary mind may sit down before one solitary cabbage,
 and find food for his thought, if not for his palate, in the reflection,
 “Truly thou mightest have been my brother.”
</p><p>
 Now, without the least shadow of a wish to prove matter self-conscious, may
 we not hold it possible that the particles entering into our corporeal
 composition still preserve some subtle properties (not memory, be it 
 understood) of the other bodies through which they have passed, which, being
 felt by our own animal nature, are suggested by it to the spiritual as a
 ground for the idea of metempsychosis?  The body will then be that part of us
 which has really transmigrated, while the soul is original.
</p><p>
 The idea that the soul has ever transmigrated leads us into painful,
 disgusting, irrational, and irreligious conclusions.  But grant that, in the
 animal life, a blind perception exists of peculiar qualities in the corporeal
 particles, arising out of former conditions through which they have passed,
 and we can then see how it may be possible for the spiritual to sympathize
 with the animal to such a degree as to etherealize these perceptions into a
 dreamy echo of its own former being.  The problem, therefore, stands thus: 
 Both for the sake of right and reason we must utterly disown the idea of
 spiritual metempsychosis.  How, then, can we explain the fact of its
 universality among the race?  We offer our hypothesis.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2> VII. The Night of Apotheosis </h2>
<p>
 It may be thought strange that, after that experience of infinite agony which
 I have last related, I should ever take hasheesh again.  “Surely,” it will be
 said, “another experiment with the drug would be a daring venture into the
 realms of insanity and death.  The gentlest name that could be applied to it
 is foolhardiness.”
</p><p>
 The morning immediately succeeding my night of horror found me as vigorous
 and buoyant as I ever was in my life. No pain, no feeling of lassitude
 remained, and on my face there was not the faintest record of the tortures
 through which I had passed.  In the midst of the very astonishment with which
 I noted this fact, I felt assured that I had done myself no injury.  Yet,
 mentally, I had the conception of being older by many years than on the night
 previous; all past experiences in life seemed separated from me by a
 measureless gulf of duration, and when the demon faces or hellish songs of my
 vision flashed up into memory, I shuddered and turned my head as if they were
 close at hand.  Quietly I made a resolve that I would experiment with the
 drug of sorcery no more, for I dreaded another plunge into the abyss of
 terror as I dreaded hell itself.
</p><p>
 Slowly passed away from my mind the image of my sufferings.  The elastic
 force of thought threw off the weight of all direful remembrances, and
 whenever I recalled my last night of vision it was only to dwell with
 tenderness upon the roses of my valley, and exult in the echo of the
 pæans which had glorified my march.  So beautiful did such memories
 make the inner world, that I wearied of the outer till it became utterly
 distasteful, like a heavy tragedy seen for the fortieth time.  I tried in
 vain to detect in the landscape that ever-welling freshness of life which
 hasheesh unveils; trees were meaningless wood, the clouds a vapory sham.  I
 thirsted for insight, adventure, strange surprises, and mystical
 discoveries.  I took hasheesh again.
</p><p>
 I was sitting at the tea-table when the thrill smote me.  I had handed my cup
 to Miss M’Ilvaine to be replenished for the first time, and she was about
 restoring it to me brimming with
 <a href="Notes/n88700.html" target="bottom">that draught “which cheers but not inebriates.”</a>
 I should be loth to calculate the arc through which her hand appeared to me
 to travel on its way to the side of my plate.  The wall grew populous with
 dancing satyrs; Chinese mandarins nodded idiotically in all the corners, and
 I felt strongly the necessity of leaving the table before I betrayed myself.
</p><p>
 I rose and hurried from the room.  A friend of mine, thinking that I had been
 taken suddenly ill, immediately followed me.  The look of wild delight with
 which I greeted him would have revealed my secret, even had I not
 spontaneously imparted it to him.
</p><p>
 In the first stages of his singular life, the hasheesh-eater finds so much
 that is strange, beautiful, or appalling, that he can restrain neither his
 outbursts of enthusiasm nor of pain.  He is big with infinite
 <a href="Notes/n04904.html" target="bottom">arcana</a>,
 which
 he feels he must disclose or perish.  Gradually self-control becomes with him
 more of a possibility, and finally it is stereotyped into a habit.  In my
 earlier experience I found it beyond my power, even with the most agonizing
 efforts, to keep back the wonders which I saw, and accordingly, the moment
 that I found my brain expanding into the hasheesh-dome, I made it my wont to
 rush from the presence of all who ought not to share my secret. When many
 days had taught me lessons of self-retention, I sat frequently for hours
 charred in demoniac flames, or lifted into the seventh heaven of ecstasy,
 with a throng around me who could not have gained the faintest intimation
 from my manner of the processes which were going on within.
</p><p>
 When <a href="Notes/n10400.html" target="bottom">Sam</a> joined me I was on
 the eve of another journey through vast territories.  I say “Sam,” for I
 shall take the liberty of calling all my friends by those familiar names
 which imbody to me all that is loving, genial, and belonging to idiosyncrasy
 in my remembrance of them.  Doubtless such a practice is discordant with
 courtly style in the most eminent degree. It would be much more polite to say
 Villiers where I meant Joe, and Cholmondeley instead of Harry; for in this
 way I should much more readily and thoroughly conciliate those minds which,
 enervated by the spicy feasts of high-life literature, are unable to find the
 least sapidity in the vocabulary of daily affections.
</p><p>
 Southey, discoursing of the Doctor, has made that mirror of true-heartedness,
 as well as true courtesy, remark
 (<a href="Notes/n29687.html" target="bottom">I quote from memory</a>),
 that among the most painful, though quiet and unnoticed
 losses which a man sustains in his passage from the infant to the gray-beard,
 is the gradual divestment of his right to be called by the name which he
 heard in the nursery and on the play-ground.  “Now,” saith Daniel Dove, with
 a gentle sigh, “even my wife speaks of me as ‘the Doctor.’”  Most genial men
 have felt the same thing with sorrow as the
 <a href="Notes/n94427.html" target="bottom">“toga virilis”</a>
 slowly wrapped them closer and closer into the reserve of middle life, hiding
 those earlier insignia of frankness and good-fellowship which no longer give
 them a claim to be hailed with affectionate intimacy, yet which every true
 man will still bear with lively remembrance upon his heart of hearts.
</p><p>
 I have always entertained a deep grudge against the cold and courtly
 <a href="Notes/n39826.html" target="bottom">Cicero</a>
 for that unworthy sneer launched at the friendship between Catiline and
 Tongilius,
 <a href="Notes/n63394.html" target="bottom">“Quem amare in prætexta cœperat.”</a>
 It was in the style of Cicero, indeed, yet not in the style of the truly
 noble man, nor of one who holds in fitting reverence the bond of our earlier
 humanities.  It seems impossible to conceive how any one dignified with the
 better and deeper feelings of our nature should become aware, with any other
 sentiment than pain, that he is surviving the days when a more intimate
 confidence and unworldly simplicity gave genial friends a right to address
 him and treat him as a brother.
</p><p>
 I shall therefore, without any apology, unless this digression may be styled
 so, call all the nearer and dearer companions of my youth by those names
 which sound as the sweetest echoes of the Past in the chambers of my memory,
 since the strings with which they vibrate in unison can not too long be kept
 thrilling in any heart that would not neglect all music beyond that with
 which the march of our dusty life in the exterior keeps step.
</p><p>
 I have said that when Sam joined me I was once more filled with the phrensy
 of travel.  I besought him to go with me, painting in the most glowing tints
 the treasures which such a gigantic tour as I had laid out would add to his
 acquaintance with the grand Kosmos.  He consented to become my
 <a href="Notes/n18415.html" target="bottom">compagnon de voyage</a> for
 <a href="Notes/n15270.html" target="bottom">a few hundred miles</a>,
 at any rate, and directly we set out.  Our way led
 through a broad meadow, at that season beautifully green, and before my gaze
 it grew into a tremendous Asiatic plateau thronged with innumerable Tartars.
 As if assembling for a foray, they rushed past me in mad haste, their oblique
 eyes snapping with a ferocious light, and plumes of horse-hair streaming from
 their tufted caps.  It is not possible to convey to a mind in its ordinary
 state the effect produced by beholding a field which one has been accustomed
 to see vacant suddenly bristling with weird and foreign forms, which by
 perfect distinctness of outline equal in reality, while they surpass in
 impressiveness the most usual objects of daily sight.
</p><p>
 Sam was a man unexcelled by any of his age that I have ever met for the
 breadth of his historic, geographical, and political knowledge.  Mention a
 fact in the Saracen annals, and straightway he would give you its date, and
 run its parallel of chronological latitude through all the empires and
 dynastics of the world.  The name of the most inconsiderable place suggested
 to him every thing of note that had ever been transacted in its neighborhood,
 and on the factious efforts of an Athenian demagogue he would build you in an
 instant the intricate fabric of all the coups d’ état, revolutions,
 and strokes of diplomacy up to the present day.  It is not to be wondered at,
 such being the case, that some incongruous remark of my own, which confounded
 two utterly distinct tribes of Tartary, should grate on his historic taste to
 such a degree as to force from him a mild correction.
</p><p>
 “It is impossible,” said Sam, “that the tribe of which you speak should
 occupy this territory through whose boundaries you inform me we are
 traveling.”
</p><p>
 The instantaneous thrill of pain which this slight contradiction darted
 through me can not be imagined by any one who does not know the intense
 sensitiveness of the hasheesh state.  In a tone of deepest reproach I said,
 “Alas! my friends, I see you do not sympathize with me.  Let us travel
 apart.”
</p><p>
 So saying, I wandered from his side and walked alone, feeling hurt in the
 very centre of my pride and self-respect.  But Sam, who now saw that he must
 humor my hallucination, followed me, and appeasing my indignation upon the
 delicate subject of the Ukraine Tartars, took my arm, and we walked together
 as before.
</p><p>
 With all the delicious ecstasy of a traveler who looks for the first time
 upon the gorgeous piles of mediæval architecture, I saw far in the
 distant east a palace rise sublimely above its emerald terraces.  We walked
 for hours and through leagues, yet it grew no nearer, and I enjoyed the
 luxury of anticipation indefinitely prolonged, yet growing sweeter by delay.
 The wind came to me freighted with spicy odors; it whispered of dalliance
 with citron blossoms, and reeled in playful circles; new-flown from its deep 
 draught among
 the vines of Muscat.
 In my ears it sang promises of immortal youth, and added its own wings to my
 already superhuman lightness.
</p><p>
 What mattered it that my far-off battlements were the walls of college, my
 mighty plain a field, and my wind of balm but an ordinary sunset breeze? To
 me all joys were real — yes, even with a reality which utterly surpasses the
 hardest facts of the ordinary world.
</p><p>
 Hasheesh is indeed an accursed drug, and the soul at last pays a most bitter
 price for all its ecstasies; moreover, the use of it is not the proper means
 of gaining any insight, yet who shall say that at that season of exaltation I
 did not know things as they are more truly than ever in the ordinary state?
 Let us not assert that the half-careless and uninterested way in which we
 generally look on nature is the normal mode of the soul’s power of vision. 
 There is a fathomless meaning, an intensity of delight in all our
 surroundings, which our eyes must be unsealed to see.  In the jubilance of
 hasheesh, we have only arrived by an improper pathway at the secret of that
 infinity of beauty which shall be beheld in heaven and earth when the veil of
 the corporeal drops off, and we know as we are known.  Then from the muddy
 waters of our life, defiled by the centuries of degeneracy through which they
 have flowed, we shall ascend to the old-time original fount, and grow
 rapturous with its apocalyptic draught.
</p><p>
 But for this reflection I had never abandoned hasheesh.  Yet through all the
 long agonies which attended its abjurement, I consoled myself with the
 knowledge that the infinite glories of the past should beam on me again. I
 had caught a glimpse through the chinks of my earthly prison of the
 immeasurable sky which should one day overarch me with an unconceived
 sublimity of view, and resound in my ear with unutterable music.  Then I
 stayed myself upon the hope, and grew into calm endurance.
</p><p>
 We may depend upon it, we have not read the world within or the world
 without.  Some mystic wind, like that of hasheesh, now and then just flutters
 the leaves of those shut books as it passes by, and the gleam of the divine
 characters for an instant ravishes us.  As from children too young to bear
 them, they are kept against that day when, grown into perfect men, the props,
 and helps, and screens of the earthly shall be removed from us, and
 <a href="Notes/n35220.html" target="bottom">“the books shall be opened.”</a>
</p><p>
 Presently we reached the doors of college.  I do not remember whether I have
 yet mentioned that in the hasheesh state an occasional awaking occurs,
 perhaps as often as twice in an hour (though I have no way of judging
 accurately, from the singular properties of the hasheesh time), when the mind
 returns for an exceedingly brief space to perfect consciousness, and views
 all objects in their familiar light.  Such an awaking occurred to me as we
 drew near the steps of the building, and I took advantage of it to request
 Sam that he would conduct me to the room of another friend of mine, if he
 were unable to remain longer with me himself.  He answered that he was
 obliged to leave me, and accordingly led me to the place I had mentioned. The
 hasheesh fantasia having returned directly after I had made my request, I
 might never have been able to find it alone.
</p><p>
 Repeatedly have I wandered past doors and houses which, in my ordinary
 condition, were as well known as my own, and have at last given up the search
 for them in utter hopelessness, recognizing not the faintest familiar trace
 in their aspect.  Certainly, a hasheesh eater should never be alone.
</p><p>
 I found
 <a href="Notes/n60293.html" target="bottom">Sidney</a>
 in his room: in his charge Sam left me, after apprising him of my state, and
 I easily persuaded him to go with me on my travels. Back of the buildings a
 very large domain of woods and fields extends toward the east.  From the door
 of one of the entries a continuous path leads to the further extent of these
 grounds, and into this path we struck. The evening shadows were deepening,
 yet the woods had not yet become so sombre as to wear that terrible air of
 mystery which, among them, in my after hasheesh-life, oppressed me to an
 unbearable degree, even in the daylight.  Our way skirted the banks of a
 <a href="Notes/n17120.html" target="bottom">little stream</a>,
 which, tinkling over its rocky bed, makes music through all those shades from
 boundary to boundary.  Coming to a convenient place, we crossed it on broad
 stepping-stones a pebble’s throw from a low waterfall, which, higher up the
 bed, was now swolen by recent rains.  An instantaneous dart of exultation
 shot through me.  Could it be possible?  Yes, true, beyond doubt!  I clapped
 my hands and cried, “The Nile! the Nile! the eternal Nile!”  Lo, now I was
 <a href="Notes/n90951.html" target="bottom">Bruce, and beside me walked
 Clapperton</a>.  “Companion of my journey,” I exclaimed, “see you yonder
 cataract?  Above it lie the sources.  Out of that gleaming chasm which you
 behold toward the east, this mystery-veiled river has poured his floods since
 God first awakened the years.  I drink in the ecstasy of his material fount
 now for the second time.  Through lonely pilgrimages I toiled, foot-sore, in
 the desert; my life hung, many a night of sleeplessness and many a day of
 famine, upon the mood of ferocious men; I did all things, I suffered all
 things; and one day, at even, the sources broke upon me.  Oh, that unshared
 view was glory enough for a lifetime!” “But why,” asked Clapperton, “has the
 world never known this discovery of yours?  In all my wanderings (and, as you
 are aware, they have been only exceeded by your own), I have never heard of
 your visit to this fountain before.”
</p><p>
 “I died in the desert on my way homeward.  As I felt the unmistakable signs
 of death come upon me, I gathered strength to trace upon a small piece of
 paper a few words, simply stating the fact of the discovery, and the bearings
 of the sources.  This I committed to my guide, extorting from him a reluctant
 promise never to part with it until he had carried it to my friends at
 Alexandria.”
</p><p>
 “Why reluctant?”
</p><p>
 “Because he declared that it was sacrilege to unveil the forehead of the
 Nile, and that he dreaded some fearful recompense for his impiety.”
</p><p>
 “Where is that paper now?  Did he fulfill his promise?”
</p><p>
 “No.  He carried the writing as far as Alexandria, and there, being overcome
 by the terrors of his superstition, burned it, and forever deprived me of the
 triumph of my labors.  Yet with you, Clapperton — you, who so well know my
 toils — I rejoice as if the world were applauding me.  Glory, glory in the
 highest, that I behold again — that I behold with <em>you</em> — the Nile,
 the eternal Nile!”
</p><p>
 My eyes ran tears of ecstasy.  I clasped Clapperton to my bosom in speechless
 joy.  I heard the river in its upper caverns hymning such invitations as
 float down to the seer, entranced, from the lips of angels. Bruce revisiting
 earth felt such exultation as can only be excelled by that of Bruce first
 freed from earth.
</p><p>
 Leaving the banks of the Nile, we struck deeper into the dense shade of pines
 and chestnuts, which, to my sense, were spice-trees of the African
 wilderness.  On a stile over which our way led sat two students repeating
 Shakspeare to each other.  To avoid their beholding my rejoicing, Sid gently
 took me into another path, yet we came near enough to hear one sentence:
</p>
<center><a href="Notes/n79850.html" target="bottom">“With this, farewell; I’m on my way to Padua.”</a></center>
<p>
 (Not exactly Shakspeare, but they meant it to be, and I was not in a mood to
 cavil.)
</p><p>
 In an instant, like the shifting of a scene, all the thoughts and images of
 Africa vanished.  Italy, the glad, the sunny, took its place, and the wood
 grew dense with palaces and fountains.  In a broad piazza we sauntered up and
 down, transfused with a dreamy summer languor, or strolled from portico to
 portico, on all sides surrounded by the most beautiful creations of Art.
</p><p>
 At first I had a dim conception of the unreality of this vision, for I saw
 its groundwork in certain material things, remembered as once existing in
 other forms.  For instance, I sometimes perceived the development of an arch
 in its transition state from two curved branches which locked over us, and
 now and then a new column grew up gradually from the vacant light-spaces
 between two trunks of trees.  But in a very short time, of course, much
 shorter than I supposed, every suspicion of the imaginary utterly vanished
 from my mind, and I no more doubted our being in some fair Italian city than
 I doubted my own existence.
</p><p>
 The effect of the hasheesh increased, as it always does, with the excitement
 of the visions and the exercise of walking.  I began to be lifted into that
 tremendous pride which is so often a characteristic of the fantasia.  My
 powers became superhuman; my knowledge covered the universe; my scope of
 sight was infinite.  I was invested with a grand mission to humanity, and
 slowly it dawned upon me that I was the Christ, come in the power and
 radiance of his millennial descent, and bearing to the world the restoration
 of perfect peace.  I spoke, and it was done: with a single sentence I
 regenerated the Creation.  A smile of exultation beamed from the awakened
 earth.  I could hear her low music of rejoicing as she perceived that the
 fullness of the times with which, for centuries, she had travailed in woe,
 had at length been brought forth.  All men once more lived in love to God and
 their neighbor, and, secure in an eternal compact, began marching on
 harmoniously to the sublime end of spiritual greatness.  The nature of all
 beasts grew mild; the satyr walked down from his mountain fastness, and led
 his young fearlessly into the presence of his old foe, the leopard; the kite
 and the dove imped their wings upon the same branch; out of the depths of
 the jungle the tiger stepped forth and gently drew near to fawn upon his
 king. The terrible lustre of his eyes was dissolved into the serene light of
 love, and as I caressed his spotted hide, he returned the kindness with a
 thankful purr.
</p><p>
 My mission being accomplished, we passed on.  Returning to the college, a
 most singular phenomenon presented itself.  The faces of all that I met were
 metamorphosed into appearances which symbolized some inner attribute, or some
 speciality of manners and habits.  One of my friends was an admirable
 whist-player, noted for his accurate observance and employment of the times
 and seasons for returning leads, finessing, and crying privilege.  His face
 was changed to a fan-like display of cards, which winked at me with a quiet
 and balmy air of exultation, as in the consciousness of being
</p><blockquote>
<a href="Notes/n12023.html" target="bottom">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;“Quite irresistible,<br />
Like a man with eight trumps in his hand at a whist-table.”</a>
</blockquote>
<p>
 Another, famous for his studently habits, a great reader, and fond of
 research, looked at me for a moment, and his visage immediately turned into a
 book-case bristling with encyclopædias.  I stretched forth my hand to
 take one from its shelf, and, by a sudden outcry, became aware that I had
 performed that amiable office known among mortals as
 <a href="Notes/n90507.html" target="bottom">pulling one’s nose</a>.
</p><p>
 But this vision of the ludicrous was soon dissipated by the return of the
 former ecstasy of pride.  Now braced for its exaltation by the few moments of
 jocose refreshment, I towered into all the sublimity of self-adulation.
 Pacing the floor, which, for my display, had been changed into that of the
 Senate,
 <a href="Notes/n84115.html" target="bottom">as Webster</a>
 revivified, I rolled a thunder-cloud of colossal argument over the head of a
 mythical opponent, and brought all time to the witness-stand with testimony
 against the direful results of some intemperate measure.
</p><p>
 And now, the hallucination changing, I was exhaustlessly rich, and as
 exhaustlessly benevolent.  Through long avenues I walked between kneeling
 files of poor, and scattered handfuls of gold into their bosoms.  “Be
 comfortable, be opulent, be luxurious,” I cried; and as the metallic rain
 dripped from my thrilling fingers, again the plaudits of my march poured in
 upon me, and the famine-stricken shouted, “Our savior!”  I rejoiced in the
 measureless pride of bounteousness.
</p><p>
 Awaking on the morrow after a succession of vague and delicious dreams, I had
 not yet returned to the perfectly natural state.  I now began to experience a
 law of hasheesh which developed its effects more and more through all the
 future months of its use.  With the progress of the hasheesh life, the effect
 of every successive indulgence grows more perduring until the hitherto
 isolated experiences become tangent to each other; then the links of the
 delirium intersect, and at last so blend that the chain has become a
 continuous band, now resting with joyous lightness as a
 <a href="Notes/n94653.html" target="bottom">chaplet</a>,
 and now mightily pressing in upon the soul like the glowing hoop of iron
 which holds martyrs to the stake.  The final months of this spell-bound
 existence, be it terminated by mental annihilation or by a return into the
 quiet and mingled facts of humanity, are passed in one unbroken yet checkered
 dream.
</p><p>
 In the morning the ludicrous side of the hasheesh sphere alone was turned
 toward me.  I was whirled through the progress of an infinite number of
 strange transmutations.  Now, as a powerful saw in some mill of a northern
 lumber region, I darted up and down at the imperative instigation of an
 overshot wheel, and on either side of me the planks flew off in the utmost
 completeness of manufacture.  Now changed to a bottle of soda-water, I ran
 hither and thither with intricate and rapid involutions, pursued by an army of 
 publicans, who, with awl in hand, were trying to break the wires which kept
 in my vital effervescence.  Weak with laughter, for I was strangely reckless
 of the peril which my life sustained, I sat down to rest, having distanced
 the whole troop of my persecutors.  Suddenly the sentiment of an intense
 mortification overcame me.  “Is it possible,” I soliloquized, “that thou, the
 descendant of an ancient and glorious line, canst be so utterly dishonored as
 to merge thy being in one of society’s grossest and basest potables?  Child
 worthy of a better destiny, I will implore the gods for thee, that in their
 condescension they may elevate thee to some more spiritual essence.”  No
 sooner said than done.  My neck grew longer, my head was night-capped with
 snowy kid, ethereal odors of delight streamed through my brain, and, exultant
 with apotheosis, I beheld by patent of nobility stamped on my crystal breast
 in these golden characters:
</p>
<p align="center">
EAU DE COLOGNE.<br />
<small><a href="Notes/n37086.html" target="bottom">JEAN MARIA DE FARINA</a>.</small>
</p><p>
 A lordly hippopotamus, I wandered in from the wilderness, and with my
 fore-foot knocked at the door of a friend of mine celebrated for wasting the
 midnight burning-fluid in the pursuit of classical and mathematical
 researches.  “Tidings!” I cried; “tidings from the interior of Africa!”  With
 a look of astonishment and half terror, for he had never seen me in the
 hasheesh state before, the lover of books opened unto me, and I passed in.
</p><p>
 An unceremonious hippopotamus, I sat down, with the most incongruous
 disregard of the breadth of beam proper to my species, in the nearest chair,
 without explanation or apology.  A poetical hippopotamus, I soared into a
 sublime description of equatorial crags, medio-terrene lakes, and marshy
 jungles.  I expatiated upon the delights of an Ethiopian existence; I grew
 rapturous over the remembered ecstasy of mud-baths and lunches upon succulent
 lotus-stems by riversides where Nature kept free restaurant for
 pachydermatous gentlemen forever.
</p><p>
 <a href="Notes/n23143.html" target="bottom">Ed</a>
 was a man of strong social impulses, most kindly heart, and high appreciation
 of the beautiful.  Yet at that moment, being ensconced in a tremendous
 munition of tomes, and supplied with stores of reading which might sustain
 the most protracted siege, pleaded preoccupation, and begged me to defer my
 lecture on the African
 <a href="Notes/n47230.html" target="bottom">far niente</a>.
 I consented, with some indignation, however, at his lack of taste.  I opened
 the door to leave his room for the sake of finding a more respectful auditor,
 when lo! to my shame, I had altogether mistaken my species, for I was the
 tallest giraffe that ever dallied amorously with a palm-bud.  Abasing my
 exalted head to suit the dimensions of the door, I passed out, and was again
 restored to the human semblance.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>
Chapter VIII.
<a href="Notes/n57447.html" target="bottom">Vos non vobis</a>
— wherein the Pythagorean is a By-stander
</h2>
<p>
 The judgment that must be passed upon the hasheesh life in retrospect is
 widely different from the one which I formed during its progress.  Now the
 drug, with all its revelation of interior mysteries, its glimpses of
 supernatural beauty and sublimity, appears as the very witch-plant of hell,
 the weed of madness.  At the time of its daily use, I forgave it for all its
 pangs, for its cruel exercise of authority, its resistless fascination, and
 its usurpation of the place of all other excitement, at the intercession of
 the divine forms which it created for my soul, and which, though growing
 rarer and rarer, when they were present retained their glory until the last.
 Moreover, through many ecstasies and many pains, I still supposed that I was
 only making experiments, and that, too, in the most wonderful field of mind
 which could be opened for investigation, and with an agent so deluding in its
 influence that the soul only became aware that the strength of a giant was
 needed to escape when its locks were shorn.
</p><p>
 In accordance with these facts, I did not suppose that I was imperiling any
 friend of mine by giving him an opportunity to make the same experiment which
 he beheld producing in me phenomena so astonishing to a mind in love with
 research.  Several of my intimate associates applied to me for the means of
 experimentally gratifying their curiosity upon the subject, and to some of
 them, as favorable opportunities presented themselves, I administered
 hasheesh, remaining by their side during the progress of the effects.  In no
 other experience can difference of temperament, physical and mental, produce
 such varieties of phenomena; nowhere can we attain so well defined an idea of
 this difference.  I shall, therefore, devote this chapter to the relation of
 some of the more remarkable of these cases.
</p><p>
 Upon
 William N——
 hasheesh produced none of the effects characteristic of fantasia.  There was
 no hallucination, no volitancy of unusual images before the eye when closed.
 Circulation, however, grew to a surprising fullness and rapidity, accompanied
 by the same introversion of faculties and clear perception of all physical
 processes which startled me in my first experiment upon myself.  There was
 stertorous breathing, dilation of the pupil, and a drooping appearance of the
 eyelid, followed at last by a comatose state, lasting for hours, out of which
 it was almost impossible fully to arouse the energies.  These symptoms,
 together with a peculiar rigidity of the muscular system, and inability to
 measure the precise compass and volume of the voice when speaking, brought
 the case nearer in resemblance to
 <a href="Notes/n65786.html" target="bottom">those recorded by Dr. O’Shaughnessy, of Calcutta</a>,
 as occurring under his immediate inspection among the natives of India than
 any I have ever witnessed.
</p><p>
 In William N—— I observed, however, one phenomenon which characterizes
 hasheesh existence in persons of far different constitutions — the expansion
 of time and space.  Walking with him a distance not exceeding a furlong, I
 have seen him grow weary and assume a look of hopelessness, which he
 explained by telling me that he never could traverse the immensity before
 him.  Frequently, also, do I remember his asking to know the time thrice in
 as many minutes, and when answered, he exclaimed, “Is it possible?  I
 supposed it an hour since I last inquired.”  His temperament was a mixture of
 the phlegmatic and nervous, and he was generally rather unsusceptible to
 stimulus.  I was anxious at the time that he should be favorably affected,
 since he had been, and afterward was still more so, in an eminent degree, the
 kind-hearted assuager of my sufferings and increaser of my joys in many an
 experience of hasheesh.  To him I ran, many a time, for companionship in my
 hasheesh journeyings, and always found in him full appreciation and sympathy.
</p><p>
 I am now glad that he learned none of the fascination of the drug, for Heaven
 only, and not the hasheesh-eater in any wise, knows where it will lead him.
</p><p>
 One of my friends in college was a man to whom it would have been physically,
 spiritually, and morally impossible ever to have borne any other name than
 <a href="Notes/n57976.html" target="bottom">Bob</a>,
 the name by which he was called among all his intimates, and which has
 an air eminently expressive of his nature.  Impulsive, enthusiastic in his
 affections, generous to a fault; excitable, fond of queer researches and
 romantic ventures, there is no other cognomen which would so typify him as to
 give more than a shadow image of his constitution — none which would so
 incarnate him as not to leave some elbow of his inner being sticking out in
 the improper place.  It is not surprising that a person of his temperament
 found much in the hasheesh condition that was strikingly attractive.
</p><p>
 At half past seven in the evening, and consequently after supping instead of
 before, as I should have preferred, he took
 <a href="Notes/n34940.html" target="bottom">twenty-five grains</a>
 of the drug.  This may seem a large bolus to those who are aware that from
 <a href="Notes/n71863.html" target="bottom">fifteen grains</a>
 I frequently got the strongest cannabine effect; but it must be kept in mind
 that, to secure the full phenomena, a much greater dose is necessary in the
 first experiment than ever after.  Unlike all other stimuli with which I am
 acquainted, hasheesh, instead of requiring to be increased in quantity as
 existence in its use proceeds, demands rather a diminution, seeming to leave,
 at the return of the natural state (if I may express myself by a rather
 material analogy), an unconsumed capital of exaltation for the next
 indulgence to set up business upon.
</p><p>
 From the untoward lateness of the hour at which the dose was administered, it
 was half past ten o’clock before any effects began to show themselves in this
 case.  At that time Bob, and Edward, the reading man, to whose favorable
 notice I had presented myself under the guise of a hippopotamus, were both
 seated, together with myself, in a well-lighted room, conversing.  Suddenly
 Bob leaped up from the lounge on which he had been lying, and, with loud peals
 of laughter, danced wildly over the room.  A strange light was in his eyes,
 and he gesticulated furiously, like a player in pantomine.  I was not in the
 least surprised by these symptoms, for I realized precisely the state of mind
 through which he was passing; yet my other companion was astonished even to
 terror with the idea that the experimenter would permanently lose his sanity.
 Suddenly he stopped dancing, and trembling, as with an undefinable fear, he
 whispered, “What will become of me?”  This question distinctly recalled all
 the horrible apprehensions of my first experiment; and, though satisfied of
 the perfect harmlessness of the result, I saw the necessity of steadying the
 sufferer’s mind upon my own firm assurance of his safety, for the sake of
 giving him quiet and endurance.  I replied, “Trust me, however singularly you
 may feel, you have not the slightest cause for fear.  I have been where you
 are now, and, upon my honor, guarantee you an unharmed return.  No evil will
 result to you; abandon yourself to the full force of your feelings with
 perfect confidence that you are in no danger.”  Entirely new and unconceived
 as is the hasheesh-world, viewed for the first time, the man of greatest
 natural courage is no more capable of bearing its tremendous realities,
 unbraced by some such exterior support, than the most feeble woman.
</p><p>
 The delirium, now rapidly mounting to its height, made it better that Bob
 should exert the supernatural activity with which he was endued out of doors,
 where the air was freer and less constraint was necessary.  Clothing my words
 in as imaginative garb as I was master of, I therefore proposed to him that
 we should set out on a journey through the wonderful lands of vision.  We
 were soon upon the pavement, he leaping in unbounded delight at the prospect
 of the grand scenery to come, I ready to humor to the utmost any pleasing
 fantasy which might possess him; and in the absence of such, or the presence
 of the contrary, to suggest fine avenues for his thought to follow-up.
</p><p>
 It will of course be perceived that I labor under a great disadvantage from
 being compelled to relate the progress of subjective states from an objective
 point of view.  My authority for all that I shall give in this case will be my
 own observation of outward phenomena and my friend’s statement of interior
 ones, which he gave to me upon returning to consciousness.  These latter were
 expressed with a height of ideality which I feel myself incompetent to give,
 and gave evidence of as remarkable an inner condition as I have ever known
 hasheesh to produce.
</p><p>
 On our first leaving the steps of the building, a grand mosque rose upon his
 vision in the distance, its minarets flaunting with innumerable
 crescent-emblazoned flags.  A mighty plain, covered with no other than a
 stinted grass, stretched between him and the mosque.  Mounted upon Arab
 horses, with incredible swiftness we sped side by side toward the structure;
 and I knew when this imagination took place by the answers which he returned
 me upon my inquiry into the reasons of his prancing as we went.  Before we
 reached the walls, arch and minaret had vanished, and, metamorphosed into an
 ostrich, he scoured the desert reaches, now utterly void of any human sign.
 Of this fact also I became aware at the moment from his own lips; for,
 although in perfect hallucination, the dual existence, as in me, was still
 perfectly capable of expressing its own states.
</p><p>
 It is not one of the least singular facts of hasheesh that its fantasia almost
 invariably takes an Oriental form.  This can not be explained upon the
 hypothesis that the experimenter remembers it as an indulgence in use among
 the people of the East, for at the acme of the delirium there is no
 consciousness remaining in the mind of its being an unnatural state.  The
 very idea of the drug is utterly forgotten, and present reality shuts out all
 inquiry into grounds for belief.  The only supposition which at all accounts
 for the fact to my own mind is that the hasheesh is the antecedent instead of
 the result of the peculiar characteristics of Oriental mind and manners.  The
 Turk and the Syrian are indeed situated amid surroundings well calculated to
 stimulate the imaginative nature.  A delicious sky, a luxuriant vegetation,
 and scenery like that of the Bosporous and Damascus are eminently calculated
 for fascination to dreams and poesy, but then hasheesh comes bearing an
 unutterably grander and richer gratification to the same music and odor
 haunted sense, and makes the highest tone in a harmony already beautiful
 almost beyond all that earth posesses.
</p><p>
 To us, of a mistier atmosphere, yet far more lively perceptions of the very
 principle of beauty, the drug brings a similar wealth of visions, and,
 conjoining its influence with a greater scope of sight and strength of thought
 than the Oriental ever possesses, fills up all deficiencies of exterior sun
 and landscape by borrowing from the activities of the experimenter.
</p><p>
 Eastern architecture, and, in fine, the sum total of Eastern manners, are all
 the embodiment and symbol of Eastern mind.  That mind, or at least its
 specialty of condition, is very much the product of those stimulants which are
 in use throughout that portion of the world, and among these hasheesh holds
 the regency, as swaying the broadest domain of mind, and most authoritatively
 ruling all faculties within it.  It is therefore the case that, wherever this
 drug comes into contact with a sensitive organization, the same fruit of
 supernatural beauty or horror will characterize the visions produced.  It is
 hasheesh which makes both the Syrian and the Saxon Oriental.
</p><p>
 That this hypothesis is more than mere vagary, it appears to me, may be proved
 by numerous parallels running through other nations than the Eastern.  It is
 not mere murky weather, chill winds, and sudden changes of temperature which
 have built up the walls of reserve in manner and masonry in architecture
 around the Englishman.  His national stimulus is beer, mildly toned by the
 moderate use of tobacco; his mental result is reticence, solidity,
 reflectiveness.
</p><p>
 Nor does the newness of his country, the peculiarities of his climate, and the
 demand of his age for rapidity of action alone erect for the American his airy
 structures, rising with a fungus-vitality from basement to cope in a fortnight,
 and the pale fence of frankness, which permits insight into all his thoughts.
 His infants stretch supplicating hands from the cradle toward their father’s
 tobacco-box;
 <a href="Notes/n91372.html" target="bottom">the olive-plants around his table</a>
 are as regularly fumigated as if they were in a green-house; his gray-beard
 uncle (whenever an American takes time to live so long) through all the house
 continually pipes a fragrant music, to which the remainder of the household
 do not refuse to dance, and from this most catholic transfusion of nicotine
 he results in that very anomalous, yet, on the whole, laudable product, our
 National Man.  This man is a singular compound of the visionary and the
 actual: visionary, because (with other causes, to be sure) his stimulant
 makes him so; actual, because the necessity of hard work in the New World of
 intense activity demands it of him.  His mind incarnates itself in structures
 whose decoration and rapidity of finish are accomplished at the risk of
 safety, permanence, and health, and in manners which caution and reserve only
 characterize when hard knocks against projecting angles of humanity have
 taught him the lesson of their needfulness.
</p><p>
 His town house is the embodiment of the cigar, as the Briton’s is that of the
 tankard, and the modes of living of both of them symbolize to a great degree
 the essence of their several stimulants.
</p><p>
 In all civilized nations, the public works of architecture are an exception to
 this rule, for the design of the pile being more cosmopolitan, national
 idiosyncrasies are merged in the more comprehensive plan which contains within
 itself the garnered excellences of all worldly art.  With the Turk it is not
 so; uncatholicized as is his nature, his mosque and his sultan’s seraglio are
 as definite incarnations of generic peculiarity as his kiosk.
</p><p>
 Excusing myself for this digression, I return to the details of the visions
 which I had commenced.
</p><p>
 The night was much darker than it should have been for a hasheesh-eater’s
 walk, who, it will be remembered, calls imperatively for light to tinge his
 visions.  The hallucination of the ostrich still remaining, we passed out
 into the street through the stone gateway at the end of the college terrace.
 The sky above us was obscured by clouds, but the moon, now at her full, was
 about three breadths of her disk above the western horizon.  I pointed through
 the trees to her radiant shield, and called Bob’s attention to the peculiar
 beauty of the view.  He clapped his hands in ecstasy, exclaiming, “Behold
 the eternal kingdom of the moonlight!”  From that moment until the planet set,
 in this kingdom he walked.  A silvery deliciousness transfused all things to
 his sight; his emotions rose and fell like tides with the thrill of the lunar
 influence.  All that in past imaginings he had ever enjoyed of moonlit river
 views, terraces, castles, and slumberous gardens, was melted into this one
 vision of rapture.
</p><p>
 At length the moon sank out of sight, and a thick darkness enveloped us in the
 lonely street, only relieved by the corner lamps, which dotted the long and
 drear prospective.  For a while we walked silently.  Presently I felt my
 companion shudder as he leaned upon my arm.  “What is the matter, Bob?” I
 asked.  “Oh!  I am in unbearable horror,” he replied.  “If you can, save me!”
 “How do you suffer?”  “This shower of soot which falls on me from heaven is
 dreadful!”
</p><p>
 I sought to turn the current of his thoughts into another channel, but he had
 arrived at that place in his experience where suggestion is powerless.  His
 world of the Real could not be changed by any inflow from ours of the
 Shadowy.  I reached the same place in after days, and it was then as
 impossible for any human being to alter the condition which enwrapped me as
 it would have been for a brother on earth to stretch out his hands and rescue
 a brother writhing in the pains of immortality.  There are men in Oriental
 countries who make it their business to attend hasheesh-eaters during the
 fantasia, and profess to be able to lead them constantly in pleasant paths of
 hallucination.  If indeed they possess this power, the delirium which they
 control must be a far more ductile state than any I have witnessed occurring
 under the influence of hasheesh at its height.  In the present instance I
 found all suggestion powerless.  The inner actuality of the visions and the
 terror of external darkness both defeated me.
</p><p>
 Again, for a short distance, we went without speaking.  And now my friend
 broke forth into a faint, yet bitter cry of “Pray for me!  I shall be lost!”
 Though still knowing that he was in no ultimate danger, I felt that it was
 vain to tell him so, and, granting his request, ejaculated, “Oh best and
 wisest God, give peace unto this man!”  “Stop! stop!” spoke my friend; “that
 name is terrible to me; I can not hear it.  I am dying; take me instantly to
 a physician.”
</p><p>
 Aware that, though no such physical need existed, there was still a great
 spiritual one if I would make him calm, I immediately promised him that I
 would do as he asked, and directed our course to the nearest doctor.  Now,
 demoniac shapes clutched at him from the darkness, cloaked from head to foot
 in inky palls, yet glaring with fiery eyes from the depths of their cowls.  I
 felt him struggling, and by main force dragged him from their visionary
 hands.  The place wherein he seemed to himself to be walking was a vast arena,
 encircled by tremendous walls.  As from the bottom of a black
 <a href="Notes/n68307.html" target="bottom">barathrum</a>,
 he looked up and saw the stars infinitely removed; they gazed mournfully at
 him with a human aspect of despairing pity, and he heard them faintly
 bewailing his perdition.  Sulphureous fires rolled in the distance, upbearing
 on their waves agonized forms and faces of mockery, and demon watch-fires
 flared up fitfully on the impenetrable battlements around him.  He did not
 speak a word, but I heard him groan with a tone that was full of fearful
 meaning.
</p><p>
 And now, in the midst of the darkness, there suddenly stood a wheel like that
 of a lottery, surrounded by one luminous spot, which illustrated all its
 movements.  It began slowly to revolve; its rapidity grew frightful, and out
 of its opening flew symbols which indicated to him, in regular succession,
 every minutest act of his past life: from his first unfilial disobedience in
 childhood — the refusal upon a certain day, as far back as infancy, to go to
 school when it was enjoined upon him, up to the latest deed of impropriety
 he had committed — all his existence flew before him like lightning in those
 burning emblems.  Things utterly forgotten — things at the time of their
 first presence considered trivial — acts as small as the cutting of a willow
 wand, all fled by his sense in arrow-flight; yet he remembered them as real
 incidents, and recognized their order in his existence.
</p><p>
 This phenomenon is one of the most striking exhibitions of the state in which
 the higher hasheesh exaltation really exists.  It is a partial sundering, for
 the time, of those ties which unite soul and body.  That spirit should ever
 lose the traces of a single impression is impossible.
 <a href="Notes/n34425.html" target="bottom">De Quincey</a>’s
 comparison of it to the
 <a href="Notes/n63778.html" target="bottom">palimpsest</a>
 manuscripts, while it is one of the most powerful that even that great genius
 could have conceived, is not at all too much so to express the truth.  We
 pass, in dreamy musing, through a grassy field; a blade of the tender herbage
 brushes against the foot; its impression hardly comes into consciousness; on
 earth it is never remembered again.  But not even that slight sensation is
 utterly lost.  The pressure of the body dulls the soul to its perception,
 other external experiences supplant it; but when the time of the final
 awakening comes, the ressurection of the soul from its charnel in the body,
 the analytic finger of inevitable light shall search out that old
 inscription, and to the spiritual eye no deep-graven record of its earthly
 triumphs shall be clearer.
</p><p>
 The benumbing influences of the body protect us here from much of remorse and
 retrospective pining.  Its weight lies heavily upon the inner sense, and
 deadens it to perception of multitudes of characters which, to be read,
 require acutest powers of discernment.  When the body is removed, the barrier
 to the Past goes also.
</p><p>
 This fact may perhaps be one of the final causes why the body exists at all.
 Why are we not born directly into the spiritual world, without having to pass
 through a weary preliminary experience hemmed in by the gross corporeal
 nature?  May not the answer be something like this?  Were the soul, at its
 first creation, introduced directly into the world where truth is an
 intuition, and stands in the dazzling light of its own essence, the dreadful
 sublimity of the view might prove its annihilation.  We accordingly pass first
 through an apprenticeship, in which we have nothing colossal either to learn
 or to do; and eternal verities dawn on us slowly, instead of breaking in like
 lightning.  The Phenomenal is at first all that we know; we have qualities and
 quantities, and through the period of infancy are content with novel
 acquisitions in this field.  Next, we become aware of certain faculties of
 induction, investing us with the power of apprehending the Notional, which
 never comes within the grasp of Sense: we learn relations which exist only to
 the thought, yet are deemed still as valid experiences as if they were tasted
 or handled.  Last of all, we mount into the Intuitional domain, and, without
 any of the props of Sense in any way to steady us, either by sensations
 perceived or suggesting relations, we know universal principles of Being face
 to face.  Up this gradual stairway of Sense, Understanding, Intuition, we
 mount to that height from which we are able to behold, with some degree of
 calmness, the infinite fields of intuitive Beauty and Truth, when the screen
 of the bodily is removed, and the scope of vision belonging to our highest
 faculty is realized to be immeasurably beyond all that our most rapturous
 visions ever conceived it.  Without this slow indoctrination, the soul might
 have flamed out in dazzling momentary irradiance, and then been extinguished
 in eternal nothingness.
</p><p>
 If it be true that the bodily is thus our shield from the lethal glories of
 the purely spiritual world, and also from the full force of painful memories
 in the past, we can easily see how a most terrible retribution might be
 wreaked upon the soul by permitting it to stand through eternity without any
 covering to dim the events of its earthly time.  Doubtless the spirit,
 interiorly in a state harmonious to the celestial concourse, will be invested
 with a spiritual body — a body which, while it does not press heavily, like
 ours of the earthy, will still so condition states of mind as to permit no
 inflow but that of delightful impressions.  But let the soul to which such
 societies and such garments are uncongenial, from the evils which he loves,
 stand bare in the presence of the Nemesis of his past life, with the
 wondrous light of the New World irradiating the terrors of her countenance,
 and all the symbols of fire and scorpion-stings will but faintly image the
 agonies of the view.  Well, then, does Paul pray,
 <a href="Notes/n22339.html" target="bottom">“Not that I may be unclothed, but clothed upon.”</a>
</p><p>
 I left the narration of my story while we were still walking toward the
 doctor’s.  At length, reaching there, we found him still sitting in his
 office, although it was now eleven o’clock.
</p><p>
 I tried in vain to obtain the first word with him; for Bob, who seemed,
 according to the frequent nature of the hasheesh hallucination, suspicious of
 some wrong about to be done him, would not allow me to say any thing which
 might tinge the opinion of the physician.  He persisted in affirming that he
 was at the point of death, although denying that he felt pain in any place
 which he could touch.  He was totally unable to inform the doctor of the
 cause of his condition; but I at last managed to tell him myself.  Like the
 great majority of practitioners, he knew nothing of the nature of the drug,
 and could only shake his head and presage evil from observing the singular
 phenomena which characterized his patient’s outward conduct.  He told Bob that
 he was very foolish to have made the experiment; was in imminent danger —
 might die; would give him a powder — ahem!
</p><p>
 With such pre-eminent consolation he was poulticing the poor fellow’s excited
 mind, when I took advantage of his going out for a dose of ipecac to follow
 him unostentatiously, feigning the intention of helping him to prepare the
 dose.  The moment that we were in another room, I said, with as much vehemence
 as was possible without Bob’s overhearing it, “For Heaven’s sake, if you have
 any mercy, tell that man that he is in no danger!  He <em>is</em> in none
 whatever.  I have made the same experiment repeatedly, and I assure you that
 all he wants is the calm assurance of his safety.”
</p><p>
 My earnest manner satisfied him of my truth, and he accordingly went into the
 room where Bob was still sitting, and comforted him very much in the same
 manner that my doctor used with me when I was terrified in my first
 experiment.  He told him, laughingly, to be in no apprehension whatever for
 results, as he would certainly recover from his present feelings intact.
</p><p>
 In an instant Bob became perfectly calm, and the former state of happiness
 succeeded his agonies.  We passed out of the doctor’s office and began
 returning home.  On the way he supposed himself a Mandarin freshly come from
 some triumph over invading tribes.  Like myself, in the vision of my
 victorious march, he heard anthems of laud and glory pealing in his ears; but
 he did still more — he played one of the instruments himself.  Always a man
 of fine musical imagination, and quite a brilliant pianist, he now possessed
 a power of melodious creation unknown in his highest natural states.  Setting
 his lips so as to send forth sounds in imiation of a bugle, he played in my
 hearing a strain of his own impromptu composition so beautiful that it would
 have done credit to any player upon wind instruments that ever obtained
 celebrity.  For
 <a href="Notes/n33704.html" target="bottom">a quarter of a mile</a>
 I enjoyed this unexpected rapture of music, in the utmost astonishment at a
 phenomenon I had never conceived of before.
</p><p>
 We reached home.  The experimenter lay down, and through all the night he was
 wrapped in visions of the utmost ecstasy.  I sat beside his bed for hours, and
 always became aware of the moment of his highest exaltation by some strain
 after the manner of that which had cheered our way up the dark and lonely
 hill, bursting from his lips, even in sleep, with delicious melody.  In the
 morning he awoke at the usual time; but, his temperament being perhaps more
 sensitive than mine, the hasheesh delight, without its hallucination,
 continued for several days.  Bob never took it again.
</p><p>
 The next case which I shall mention is that of my friend
 <a href="Notes/n12745.html" target="bottom">Fred W——</a>,
 who, although now having abandoned hasheesh forever, still, from the first
 experiment he made with it, was so delighted with the spell that for several
 months he made trial of its powers, as successfully, if never to the same
 extent, as myself.  His temperament was the sanguine and nervous commingled;
 his taste for the arts amounted to a passion.  The initiatory test of hasheesh
 which he made gave him only its space and time expanding effects, but he had
 obtained a sufficient glimpse of its weirdness to make him try again.
</p><p>
 Upon many a bright moonlight night have I walked with him through streets made
 balmy by the breath of the summer night, or rowed our boat along the silvery
 river while he lay in ecstatic musing upon the stern seat.  In the dreams of
 such a man as he or the last one whom I mentioned, by sympathy I lived almost
 as delicious a hasheesh life as in my own.  Once do I remember well, while we
 were floating noiselessly between those
 <a href="Notes/n49987.html" target="bottom">twin welkins</a>,
 the glorious sky above us, and its image mirrored in the stream below, his
 beholding in the clouds that lifted their beamy masses on the western horizon
 a resplendent city, built amphitheatrically like Algiers, yet in every dome
 and architrave beautiful with the taintless lustre of marble.  And now he
 cried, “Sing! my mood is congenial to the ethereal spirit of music.”  I
 softly hummed
 <a href="Notes/n08356.html" target="bottom">“Spargi d’amaro pianto.”</a>
 “That is ecstasy!” he broke forth once more.  “Do you remember those words,
 <a href="Notes/n18200.html" target="bottom">‘Architecture is frozen music?’</a>
 With your ascending notes I saw grand battlements rise immensely into the
 sky; with the descending tones they sank again, and through all your song I
 have sat enamored of one delicious dance of Parian marble.”
</p><p>
 But his most wonderful experience — wonderful for its exceeding beauty, but
 still more so for the glimpse which it gave him of the mind’s power of
 sympathetic perception, was a vision which he had after that which I have
 just related.  Having taken hasheesh and felt its influence already for
 several hours, he still retained enough of conscious self-control to visit
 the room of a certain excellent pianist without exciting the suspicion of the
 latter.  Fred threw himself upon a sofa immediately on entering, and asked
 the artist to play him some piece of music, without naming any one in
 particular.
</p><p>
 The prelude began.  With its first harmonious rise and fall the dreamer was
 lifted into the choir of a grand cathedral.  Thenceforward it was heard no
 longer as exterior, but I shall proceed to tell how it was internally
 embodied in one of the most wonderful imaginative representations that it has
 ever been my lot to know.
</p><p>
 The windows of nave and transept were emblazoned, in the most gorgeous
 coloring, with incidents culled from saintly lives.  Far off in the chancel,
 monks were loading the air with essences that streamed from their golden
 censers; on the pavement, of inimitable mosaic, kneeled a host of reverent
 worshippers in silent prayer.
</p><p>
 Suddenly, behind him, the great organ began a plaintive minor like the murmur
 of some bard relieving his heart in
 <a href="Notes/n24394.html" target="bottom">threnody</a>.
 This minor was joined by a gentle treble voice among the choir in which he
 stood.  The low wail rose and fell as with the expression of wholly human
 emotion.  One by one the remaining singers joined in it, and now he heard,
 thrilling to the very roof of the cathedral, a wondrous
 <a href="Notes/n27674.html" target="bottom">miserere</a>.
 But the pathetic delight of hearing was soon supplanted by, or rather mingled
 with, a new sight in the body of the pile below him.  At the farther end of
 the nave a great door slowly swung open and a bier entered, supported by
 solemn bearers.  Upon it lay a coffin covered by a heavy pall, which, being
 removed as the bier was set down in the chancel, discovered the face of the
 sleeper.  It was the dead
 <a href="Notes/n21892.html" target="bottom">Mendelssohn</a>!
</p><p>
 The last cadence of the death-chant died away; the bearers, with heavy tread,
 carried the coffin through an iron door to its place in the vault; one by one
 the crowd passed out of the cathedral, and at last, in the choir, the dreamer
 stood alone.  He turned himself also to depart, and, awakened to complete
 consciousness, beheld the pianist just resting from the keys.  “What piece
 have you been playing?” asked Fred.  The musician replied it was
 “Mendelssohn’s Funeral March!”
</p><p>
 This piece, Fred solemnly assured me, he had never heard before.  The
 phenomenon thus appears inexplicable by any hypothesis which would regard it
 as mere coincidence.  Whether this vision was suggested by an unconscious
 recognition of Mendelssohn’s style in the piece performed, or, by the
 awakening of some unknown intuitional faculty, it was produced as an original
 creation, I know not, but certainly it is as remarkable an instance of
 sympathetic clairvoyance as I ever knew.
</p><p>
 <a href="Notes/n84967.html" target="bottom">Dan</a>, the partner of my
 hasheesh-walk mentioned as occurring in the town of
 <a href="Notes/n13542.html" target="bottom">P——</a>,
 was, at the same time as myself, a member of the college.  The
 <a href="Notes/n44115.html" target="bottom">Coryphæus</a>
 of witty circles, and the light of all our festivals, he was still
 imaginative in higher spheres, and as worthily held the rostrum and the
 bard’s chair as his place by the genial fireside or generous table.  A poet,
 and an enthusiastic lover as well as performer of music, I supposed that the
 effect of hasheesh upon his susceptible temperament would be delightful in
 the extreme.  But to such a result, the time at which he took the drug was
 one of the most unfavorable in the world — when his nervous system was in a
 state of even morbid excitability.  We had started together on a walk when
 the thrill came on.  And such a thrill — or, rather, such a succession of
 thrills — it is wonderful how a human organism could sustain.  At first a
 cloud of impenetrable mystery inwrapt him; then upon the crown of his head a
 weight began to press.  It increased in gravity without gaining bulk, and at
 last, breaking through the barrier of the skull, it slid down the spinal
 column like lightning, convulsing every nerve with one simultaneous shudder
 of agony.
</p><p>
 This sensation was repeated again and again, until, with horror, he called on
 me to return, as assured as I had ever been in my first experiments that
 death was soon to be the result of the shock.  I instantly obeyed his wish,
 and on reaching his room he lay down.  Of a sudden all space expanded
 marvelously, and into the broad area where he reclined marched a multitude
 of bands from all directions, discoursing music upon all sorts of instruments,
 and each band playing a different march on a different key, yet all, by some
 scientific arrangement, preserving perfect harmony with each other, and most
 exquisitely keeping time.  As the symphony increased in volume, so also did it
 heighten in pitch, until at last the needle-points of sound seemed to
 concentre in a demon music-box of incredible upper register, which whirled the
 apex of its scream through the dome of his head, inside of which it was
 playing.
</p><p>
 Now, on the wall of the room, removed to a great distance by the hasheesh
 expansion, a monstrous head was spiked up, which commenced a succession of
 grimaces of the most startling yet ludicrous character.  First its ferociously
 bearded under jaw extended forward indefinitely, and then, the jaw shooting
 back, the mouth opened from ear to ear.  Now the nose spun out into absurd
 enormity, and now the eyes winked with the rapidity of lightning.
</p><p>
 Yet suffering in Dan bore an excessive over-ratio to mirth.  In his greatest
 pain he had framed a withering curse against some one who had entered the
 room, but when he tried to give it utterance his lips failed in their office
 as if paralyzed.  I gave him water when his thirst had become extreme, and the
 same sensations of a cataract plunging down his throat which I have before
 described occurred so powerfully that he set the glass down, unwilling to
 risk the consequences of his draught.
</p><p>
 Returning to consciousness, he did not, however, recover from the more
 moderate hasheesh effects for months.  The nervous thrills which I have
 related reappeared to him at intervals, and his dreams constantly wore a
 hasheesh tint.  Indeed, in all cases which I have known, this drug has
 retained a more enduring influence than any stimulent in the whole catalogue.
</p><p>
 A number of experiments made upon other persons with more or less success,
 yet none of them characterized by any phenomenon differing from those already
 detailed, prove conclusively that upon persons of the highest nervous and
 <a href="Notes/n50346.html" target="bottom">sanguine</a>
 temperaments hasheesh has the strongest effect; on those of the bilious
 occasionally almost as powerful a one; while lymphatic constitutions are
 scarcely influenced at all except in some physical manner, such as vertigo,
 nausea, coma, or muscular rigidity.  Yet to this statement there are striking
 exceptions, arising out of the operation of some latent forces of vitality
 which we have not yet included in our physical or psychical science.  Until
 the laws which govern these are fully apprehended, hasheesh must ever remain
 a mystery, and its operation in any specific case an uncertainty.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>
Chapter IX.  <a href="Notes/n61734.html" target="bottom">The Shadow of
Bacchus, the Shadow of Thanatos</a>, and the Shadow of Shame
</h2>
<center><table width="80%" border="1"><tr><td>
 <font color="#ff0000">NOTE: You can see where Ludlow reworked a portion of
 his earlier article
 <a href="../TheApocalypseOfHasheesh/index.html#chapter9">“The Apocalypse of
 Hasheesh”</a> to write this chapter.
</td></tr></table></center>
<p>
 Once more at the table I was seized by the hand of the hasheesh genie.
 Dinner was nearly over, and I escaped into the street without being
 suspected.
</p><p>
 Street did I say?  Ah no!  That conventional synonym of all dust, heat, and
 garbage is unheard upon the sunny slopes of
 <a href="Notes/n76018.html" target="bottom">Mount Bermius</a>,
 where I wandered Bacchus-smitten among the
 <a href="Notes/n07757.html" target="bottom">Mænades</a>.
 Through the viny shades that embowered our dance of rapture,
 <a href="Notes/n28268.html" target="bottom">Haliacmon</a>
 threw the gleam of his sky-bright waters, and the noon rays, sifted through
 leaves and clusters, fell on us softened like
 <a href="Notes/n36991.html" target="bottom">gold into the lap of Danae</a>.
 Grapes above us, grapes around us, grapes every where, made the air fragrant
 as a censer.  They dropped with the burden of their own sweetness; they shed
 volatile dews of ecstasy on every sense.  Constellations of empurpled orbs,
 they dissolved the outer light of heaven by their own translucency; and from
 their hemispheres of silver down, which looked toward the sun, to those
 hemispheres which turned in upon our dance a gaze half of jet, half of
 sapphire, they transmitted the gentle radiance, until it bathed our cheeks
 and foreheads in the hue of autumn sunsets.  Together with troops of
 Bacchantes I leaped madly among the clusters; I twirled my
 <a href="Notes/n76850.html" target="bottom">thyrsus</a>,
 and cried
 <a href="Notes/n71937.html" target="bottom">Evoë Bacche</a>
 with the loudest.  On a delicious wind of fragrance the fawn-skin floated
 backward from my shoulders, and the viny leaves and tendrils of my garland
 caressed my temples lovingly.  I drank the blood of grapes like nectar; I
 sang hymns to
 <a href="Notes/n40841.html" target="bottom">the son of Semele</a>;
 I reeled under the possession of the divine afflatus.  Around me in endless
 mazes circled beauteous shapes of men and women; with hands enclasped we
 danced and sang, and the
 Mænad houris
 overshadowed me with their luxuriant and disheveled hair.
</p><p>
 Now, wandering from their throng in a rapture which, too high to be imparted,
 sought some solitude where it could shed itself forth unheard, I passed
 through the college gateway, and began traveling up the long walk which
 finally led into the woods toward the east — finally, I say, for I remember
 even now the measureless stretch of the journey.
</p><p>
 At length, reaching the borders of the stream which had before come to me the
 Nile, and which, through my whole hasheesh life, witnessed many a delirium of
 joy and torture, I sat down upon a high, precipitous bank which overhung the
 water, and gave myself up to my fantasia.  The stream broadened and grew
 glorified: it was the Amazon, and on a towering bluff I was gazing down the
 liquid sweep toward the sea.  Now a great ship came gliding past, lifting its
 top-gallant far above my post of observation, and men ran up the shrouds to
 peer curiously at me.  With her long pennant flying and every inch of her
 courses shaken out, she passed me majestically, and I climbed down to the
 brink of the river to catch the last look at her, and see it returned from
 another inquisitive gazer at the taffrail.
</p><p>
 I wandered completely through the woods, and came out into a broad field upon
 the farther side.  Before me rose the buildings of a grand square, in some
 city whose name, whose nation I could not even imagine, so utterly foreign
 did it appear to any thing in the world of modern days.  In the centre of the
 square a mighty host had assembled to inaugurate the equestrian statue of a
 hero, which, exquisitely carved in a rose-tinted marble, rose on its colossal
 pedestal far above their heads.  I was drawn toward them by an irresistible
 impulse, for sculpture and architecture had reached, in that city, the
 highest ideal of art.  I thought of the hero, and seemed to share the glory
 of his triumph.
</p><p>
 Then out of the borders of the dense wood from which I had just emerged came
 a hot and hissing whisper, “Kill thyself! kill thyself!”  Shuddering, I
 turned to see who spoke.  No one was visible.  Again, with still intenser
 earnestness, the whisper was repeated; and now unseen tongues syllabled it on
 all sides and in the air above me.  To these words soon arguments were added,
 until the atmosphere seemed all aglow with fierce breathings of “Thou shalt
 be immortal; thou shalt behold the hidden things of God.  The Most High
 commands thee to kill thyself.”  “My God!” I cried, “can this be true?  I
 will obey thee, and drink in the eternities.”
</p><p>
 Feeling myself as mightily pressed on to do the deed as by a direct behest of
 Deity; daring not, for my soul’s sake, to resist the utterances; and
 immeasurably exalted with the prelibation of the glories that, in a moment,
 were to flow in upon me, in frantic fury I drew forth my knife, opened it,
 and placed it at my throat.  Another heart-throb, and all would have been
 over.
</p><p>
 It was just then that I felt the blow of some invisible hand strike my arm;
 my hand flew back, and, with the force of the shock, the knife went spinning
 away into the bushes.  The whispers ceased.  I looked up into heaven, and lo!
 from zenith to horizon, an awful angel of midnight blackness floated, with
 poised wings, on the sky.  His face looked unutterable terrors into me, and
 his dreadful hand, half clenched, was hollowed above my head, as if waiting
 to take me by the hair. 
 <a href="Notes/n15726.html" target="bottom">Across the firmament a chariot came like lightning</a>;
 its wheels were rainbow-suns that rolled in tremendous music; no charioteer
 was there, but in his place flashed the glory of an intense brightness.  At
 its approach the
 <a href="Notes/n71991.html" target="bottom">sable</a>
 angel turned and rushed downward into the horizon, that seemed to smoke as he
 slid through it; and, thank God! from
 <a href="Notes/n91778.html" target="bottom">Azrael</a>
 I was saved.
</p><p>
 How many a temptation, which the ordinary grossness of the ear prevents us
 from ascribing to its true external source, and which we would fain persuade
 ourselves is nothing but our own thought, would come to us thus in a real
 demon-voice were the bands of the body but a little loosened!  In how many
 attractions toward good and repulsions from evil would we then feel the touch
 of angel hands!  The world at present is, to a great degree,
 <a href="Notes/n87783.html" target="bottom">Sadducee</a>;
 it scoffs at the Spiritual, which for blindness it can not discern, and lives
 in meat and bone.  The best men conservatively go half way to shake hands with
 the most unspiritual skeptic, and acknowledge with him that the most
 reasonable way to account for our wooings and our warnings is the reaction of
 soul upon itself.  What these poor lovers of the earthy will do when they
 arrive among the realities of another world, it is hard to say.  When this
 poor, mouldy, moth-eaten, time-tattered cloak of the corporeal, which for
 years has flapped about their heads in the gusts of worldly fortune, or
 tangled in its wet rags the feet of the soul that were trying to climb higher
 — when this poor cloak falls off, and they stand transformed into that most
 dreaded bugbear of their previous lives, spirit — we may, perhaps, hear them
 cry out in agony, “Oh, my beloved garment! my best suit! what will become of
 thee?” and see them diving headlong off the battlements of light to recover
 the only part of their human wardrobe in which they can feel comfortable.
</p><p>
 After my escape from death I returned to the border of the brook, and began
 pacing back and forth upon a long flat stone around which the shelve of the
 bank curved.  My surroundings instantly became theatrical; the woods behind
 me changed into a back scene, and on a grand stage I was holding entranced a
 great audience, whom I beheld before me rising in colossal tiers from earth
 to sky.  The part I was acting was that of a victorious soldier in some
 tragedy whose words I improvised, and, growing rapidly into the interest of
 my speech, I poured forth words — now in prose and now in verse — which
 swayed the hearers like a whirlwind.  As my manner increased in earnestness,
 I saw a strange and dreadful look of suspicion overshadowing every face of
 the thousands in my audience.  From the searching stare of the pit I sought
 relief in turning my face toward the boxes.  The same stony glance from under
 eyebrows met me still, and when I raised my despairing countenance to the
 galleries, the same quenchless scrutiny poured down upon me.  “Can it be?” I
 asked myself.  “Oh! they know my secret!” and at that instant one maddening
 chorus broke from the whole theatre: “Hasheesh! hasheesh! he has eaten
 hasheesh!”  Then, with one tumultuous uprising, the concourse fled.  From the
 stage I crept away, consumed by an unutterable shame.  I sought a place upon
 the bank of the stream still lower down, where a large hazel-bush leaned over
 the water, and beneath its branches I crouched.  The helmet and corslet were
 gone.  I looked at my garments, and beheld them foul and ragged as a beggar’s.
 From head to foot I was an incarnation of the genius of squalidity.
</p><p>
 Alas! even here I could not hide.  I had chosen my asylum on the very
 pavement of a great city’s principal thoroughfare.  Children went by to
 school, and pointed at me in derision; loungers stood still, and searched me
 with inquisitive scorn.  The multitude of man and beast all eyed me; the very
 stones of the street mocked me with a human raillery as I cowered against a
 side wall in my bemired rags.
</p><p>
 Now, mixing with the throng of passers-by, and no more real than they, two of
 my college friends came strolling along the brook.  They saw and knew me, and
 my shame reached its unbearable height when I saw them approach me with looks
 which I thought also of sarcasm.  But, as they drew nearer, they spoke to me
 kindly, and asked what was the matter with me, and why I sat hiding behind
 the hazel-branches.  I hesitated for a moment, but, on their promise of
 secrecy, told them my latest experience.  They sat down beside me, and in the
 diversion of talking the hallucination passed by.
</p><p>
 Suddenly an unconquerable apprehension possessed me.  There were certain
 secrets which for my right arm I would not have betrayed, and yet I felt
 imperatively called upon to speak them.  I struggled against the impulse with
 the thews of a spiritual
 <a href="Notes/n02806.html" target="bottom">Titan</a>.
 I was determined to conquer it, yet, that I might provide against a failure,
 I conceived this expedient.  Picking up a withered leaf from the bank of the
 stream, I called the two to hold it, each by a portion of the rim, while I
 grasped it by the stem.  In this way we raised the leaf toward heaven, and
 with our other hands clasped in each other, I solemnly repeated this
 adjuration: “As this leaf shall be withered in the fiery breath of the final
 day, so may we be withered in the vengeance of the Eternal if aught
 that may be said here pass our lips without the consent of us all three.”
 Here we all said “Amen,” and once more I was at ease.  I did not betray my
 own secrecy.
</p><p>
 When I became calm the two left me and returned to their rooms.  I wandered
 back to my old station on the high ledge, where I had seen the ship sweep by
 me, and sat down.  When I looked into the sky between the tree-tops, the sun
 seemed reeling from his place, and the clouds danced around him like a
 chorus.  I turned my eyes downward, and found that I was surrounded by
 warriors, who had come to bear me an invitation to
 <a href="Notes/n54856.html" target="bottom">the coronation of Charlemagne</a>.
 “In a moment I will go with you,” was my reply, “but first I must drink; I am
 dreadfully athirst.”  The stream was rattling away directly below me; my
 distance from it by the most easy roundabout descent was not more than
 <a href="Notes/n57988.html" target="bottom">fifty feet</a>,
 yet I must relate, even at the risk of saying too much of the hasheesh
 expansion of distance, that in going to it I seemed passing down the
 league-long ridge of a mountain.  I walked, I roamed, I traveled before
 reaching it, and at last, lying down upon the water’s brim.  I drank such
 streams of refreshment as appeared to lower the flood.  On my return, after
 toiling up the weary steep, my escort had gone, and I certainly could not
 blame them, if the length of my unceremonious absence seemed to them half as
 great as it did to me.
</p><p>
 Wandering through jungle, heather, brake, and fern — through savanna,
 oak-opening, and prairie — through all imagined and unimaginable countries —
 now despairing of my ability ever to find my way, and now plucking heart to
 press on — through many a day, or rather through one boundless perpetual day
 of journeying, I went until I reached home.
</p><p>
 Throwing myself down upon a bed, I was immediately compensated for all past
 sufferings.  In the middle of a vast unpeopled plain I stood alone.  With one
 quick ravishment I was borne upward, as on superhuman wings, until, standing
 on the very cope of heaven, I looked down and saw beneath me all the worlds
 that God has made, not wheeling upon their beamy paths through ether, nor yet
 standing without significance like orbed clods.
</p><p>
 By an instantaneous revealing I became aware of a mighty harp which lay
 athwart the celestial hemisphere, and filled the while sweep of vision before
 me.  The lambent flame of myriad stars was burning in the azure spaces
 between its strings, and glorious suns gemmed with unimaginable lustre all
 its colossal framework.  While I stood overwhelmed by the vision, a voice
 spoke clearly from the depth of the surrounding ether: “Behold the harp of
 the universe.”
</p><p>
 In an instant I realized the typification of the grand harmony of God’s
 infinite creation, for every influence, from that which nerves the wing of
 <a href="Notes/n98604.html" target="bottom">Ithuriel</a>
 down to the humblest force of growth, had there its beautiful and peculiar
 representative string.
</p><p>
 As yet the music slept, when the voice spake to me again, “Stretch forth
 thine hand and wake the harmonies.”  Trembling, yet daring, I swept the harp,
 and straightway all heaven thrilled with an unutterable music.  My arm
 strangely lengthened, I grew bolder, and my hand took a wider range.  The
 symphony grew more intense; overpowered, I ceased, and heard tremendous
 echoes coming back from the infinitudes.  Again I smote the chords, but,
 unable to endure the sublimity of the sound, I sank into an ecstatic trance,
 and was thus borne off unconsciously to the portals of some new vision.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>
 Chapter X.  
 <a href="Notes/n29702.html" target="bottom">Nimium</a>
 — the
 <a href="Notes/n90651.html" target="bottom">Amreeta</a>
 Cup of Unveiling
</h2>
<p>
 It was shortly after the last vision which has been related that I first
 experienced those sufferings which are generated by a dose of hasheesh taken
 to prolong the effects of a preceding one.
</p><p>
 Through half a day I had lain quietly under the influence of the weed,
 possessed by no hallucination, yet delighted with a flow of pleasant images,
 which passed by under my closed eyelids.  Unimaginable
 <a href="Notes/n31875.html" target="bottom">houris</a> intoxicated the
 sense with airy ballet-dances of a divine gracefulness, rose-wreathed upon a
 state of roses, and flooded with the blush of a rosy atmosphere.  Through
 grand avenues of overarching elms I floated down toward the glimpse of an
 impurpled sky, caught through the vista, or came glancing through the air
 over gateways of
 <a href="Notes/n37304.html" target="bottom">syenite</a>,
 rose-tinted by the atmosphere, and in Egypt walked among the
 <a href="Notes/n83176.html" target="bottom">Caryatides</a>.
 Up mystic pathways, on a mountain of evergreens, the priests of some nameless
 religion flocked, mitre-crowned, and passed into the temple of the sun over
 the threshold of the horizon.  Now,
 <a href="Notes/n05638.html" target="bottom">“ringed with the azure world,”</a>
 I stood, a lonely hemisphere above me, a calm and voiceless sea beneath me;
 suddenly an island of feathery palms floated into the centre of the watery
 expanse, and gauze-winged sprites dropped down upon its shore.  Now
 landscapes of strange loveliness slowly slid before me, but stopped at my
 will, that I might wander far up their music-haunted bays, and sit, bathed in
 sunlight, on the giant rock-fragments which lay around their unpeopled
 shores.
</p><p>
 But once did I open my eyes and leap up in fear; for into the gardens of the
 Grecian villa where I walked among statues and fountains, an incongruous
 horde of Indian braves burst whooping, in their war-dance; and writhing in
 savage postures, with brandished club and tomahawk, they called upon my name,
 and looked for me through the olive-trees.  Lying down again, I soared into
 <a href="Notes/n83585.html" target="bottom">the dome of St. Peter’s</a>,
 and, lighting on
 <a href="Notes/n07605.html" target="bottom">the pen of the apostle</a>,
 laid my hand upon the angel’s shoulder.  A mighty stretch of arm indeed; yet,
 to the hasheesh-eater, all things are possible.
</p><p>
 About the hour of noon I found the effects of my first dose rapidly passing
 off.  It had been a small one, possibly
 <a href="Notes/n71863.html" target="bottom">fifteen grains</a>,
 and, as I have said, produced no hallucination; yet so enamored had I become
 of the procession of pleasing images which it set in motion, that, for the
 sake of prolonging it, I took
 <a href="Notes/n89516.html" target="bottom">five grains</a>
 more.
</p><p>
 Hour after hour went by; I returned to the natural state, and gave up all
 idea of any result from the last dose.  At nine o’clock in the evening I was
 sitting among my friends writing, while they talked around me.  I became
 aware that it was gradually growing easier for me to express myself; my pen
 glanced presently like lightning in the effort to keep neck and neck with my
 ideas.  At first I simply wondered at the phenomenon, without in the least
 suspecting the hasheesh which I had eaten nine hours before.  At last,
 thought ran with such terrific speed that I could no longer write at all.
 Throwing down my pen, I paced the room, chafed my forehead, and strove to
 recover quiet by joining in the conversation of those about me.
</p><p>
 In vain! intense fever boiled in my blood, and every heart-beat was the
 stroke of a colossal engine.  Within me I felt that prophecy of dire
 suffering which the hasheesh-eater recognizes as unmistakably as were it
 graven by the finger of light, but whose signs, to all but him, are
 incommunicable.  In agony of spirit I groaned inwardly, “My God, help me!”
</p><p>
 The room grew unbearable with a penetrating glory of light.  I mounted into
 it, I expanded through it, with a blind and speechless pain, which, in my
 very heart’s core, was slowly developing itself into something afterward to
 burst forth into demoniac torture.  I felt myself weeping, and ran to a
 looking-glass to observe the appearance of my eyes.  They were pouring forth
 streams of blood!  And now a sudden hemorrhage took place within me; my heart
 had dissolved, and from my lips the blood was breaking also.
</p><p>
 Still, with that self-retent which a hasheesh eater acquires by many a bitter
 discipline, I withheld from my friends the knowledge of my torture, averting
 my face until the hallucination passed by.  Indeed, as often occurs at such
 times, a paralysis of speech had taken place, which prevented me from
 communicating with others: not physical, but spiritual; for the recital of
 such pain seems to increase it tenfold by drawing its outlines more
 distinctly to the perception, and therefore I did not dare to give it
 utterance.
</p><p>
 And now a new fact flashed before me.  This agony was not new; I had felt it
 ages ago, in the same room, among the same people, and hearing the same
 conversation.  To most men, such a sensation has happened at some time, but
 it is seldom more than vague and momentary.  With me it was sufficiently
 definite and lasting to be examined and located as an actual memory.  I saw
 it in an instant, preceded and followed by the successions of a
 distinctly-recalled past life.
</p><p>
 What is the philosophy of this fact?  If we find no grounds for believing
 that we have ever lived self-consciously in any other state, and can not thus
 explain it, may not this be the solution of the enigma?  At the moment of the
 soul’s reception of a new impression, she first accepts it as a thing
 entirely of the sense; she tells us how large it is, and of what quality.  To
 this definition of its boundaries and likenesses succeeds, at times of high
 activity, an intuition of the fact that the sensation shall be perceived
 again in the future unveiling that is to throw open all the past.
 Prophetically she notes it down upon the indestructible leaves of her diary,
 assured that it is to come out in the future revelation.  Yet we who, from
 the tendency of our thought, reject all claims to any knowledge of the
 future, can only acknowledge perceptions as of the present or the past, and
 accordingly refer the dual realization to some period gone by.  We perceive
 the correspondence of two sensations, but, by an instantaneous process, give
 the second one a wrong position in the succession of experiences.  The soul
 is regarded as the historian when she is in reality the
 <a href="Notes/n20751.html" target="bottom">sibyl</a>;
 but the misconception takes place in such a microscopic portion of time that
 detection is impossible.  In the hasheesh expansion of seconds into minutes,
 or even according to a much mightier ratio, there is an opportunity
 thoroughly to scrutinize the hitherto evanescent phenomena, and the truth
 comes out.  How many more such prophecies as these may have been rejected
 through the gross habit of the body we may never know until spirit vindicates
 her claim in a court where she must have audience.
</p><p>
 At length the torture of my delirium became so great that I could no longer
 exist unsustained by sympathy.  To
 <a href="Notes/n57976.html" target="bottom">Bob</a>,
 as possessing, from his own experience, a better appreciation of that which I
 suffered, I repaired in preference to all others.  “Let us walk,” said I; “it
 is impossible for me to remain here.”
</p><p>
 Arm-in-arm we passed down the front steps.  And now all traces of the
 surrounding world passed away from before me like marks wiped from a slate.
 When we first emerged from the building, I noticed that the night was dark,
 but this was the last I knew of any thing external.  I was beyond all
 troubles from earth or sky; my agonies were in the spiritual, and there all
 was terrific light.  By the flame of my previous vision the corporeal had
 been entirely burned off from about the soul, and I trod its charred ruins
 under foot without a remembrance that they had ever been sensitive or part of
 me.  A voice spoke to me, “By the dissolution of fire hast thou been freed,
 to behold all things as they are, to gaze on realities, to know principles,
 to understand tendencies of being.”
</p><p>
 I now perceived that I was to pass through some awful revelation.  It proved
 to be both Heaven and Hell, the only two states in the universe which
 together comprehend all free-agent creatures, whether in the Here or the
 hereafter.  Of both I drank tremendous draughts, holding the cup to my lips
 as may never be done again until the draught of one of them is final.
</p><p>
 Over many a mountain range, over plains and rivers, I heard wafted the cry of
 my household, who wept for me with as distinct a lamentation as if they were
 close at hand.  Above all the rest,
 <a href="Notes/n83634.html" target="bottom">a sister</a>
 mourned bitterly for a brother who was about to descend into hell!
</p><p>
 Far in the distance rolled the serpentine fires of an infinite furnace; yet
 did this not seem to be the place to which I was tending, but only the symbol
 of a certain spiritual state which in this life has no representative.  And
 now the principles of being, which the prophetic voice had foretold that I
 should see, suddenly disclosed themselves.  Oh, awful sight!  Iron, for they
 were unrelenting; straight as the ideal of a right line, for they were
 unalterable; like colossal railways they stretched from the centre whereon I
 stood.  Yet more were they to me than their mere material names, for they
 embodied an infinity of sublime truth.  What that truth was I strove to
 express to my companion, yet in vain, for human language was yet void of
 signs which might characterize it.  “Oh God!” I cried, “grant me the gift of
 a supernatural speech, that I may, if ever I return, come to humanity like a
 new apostle, and tell them of realities which are the essence of their
 being!”  I perceived that this, also, was impossible.  But vaguely, then,
 like some far-sighted one who points his brethren through the rack and
 tempest to a distant shore, should I ever be able to disclose what I had seen
 of the Real to men who dwelt amid the Shadowy.
</p><p>
 For days afterward I remembered the unveiling.  I myself knew that which it
 disclosed, yet could not tell it; and now all the significance of it has
 faded from my mind, leaving behind but the bare shard and husk of the
 symbols.
</p><p>
 The railway which I saw appeared twofold: one arm led toward the far fires of
 my torture, the other into a cloudy distance which veiled its end completely
 from my sight.  Upon the first I traveled, yet not on wheels, for I felt my
 feet still upbearing me through all the stages of an infinitely rapid
 progress.
</p><p>
 Symbols — symbols every where.  All along my journey they flashed forth the
 apocalypse of utterly unimagined truths.  All strange things in mind, which
 had before been my perplexity, were explained — all vexed questions solved.
 The springs of suffering and of joy, the action of the human will, memory,
 every complex fact of being, stood forth before me in a clarity of revealing
 which would have been the sublimity of happiness but for their relation to
 man’s tendencies toward evil.  I was aware at the time (and I am no less so
 now) that, to a mind in its natural state, the symbols by which I was taught
 would be marrowless and unmeaning; yet so powerfully were they
 correspondences to unpreconceived spiritual verities, that I can not refrain
 from giving one or two of them in this recital.
</p><p>
 Hanging in a sky of spotless azure, within the walls of my own heart,
 appeared my soul as a coin flaming with glories, which radiated from the
 impress of God’s face stamped upon it.  This told me an unutterable truth of
 my being.  Again the soul appeared as a vast store of the same coin shed
 prodigally upon the earth.  Through clefts in the rocky wall which rose
 beside my way were thrust, in a manner expressive of wondrous craft, barbed
 talons, which, grasping the coin one by one, as a fish-hook holds the prey,
 drew them slowly in, while I stood helpless, shrieking in the desert
 loneliness.  As each piece of my treasure slid through the crevices, I heard
 it fall, with a cruel metallic ring, upon the bottom of some invisible
 strong-box, and this ring was echoed by a peal of hollow laughter from
 within.  Another truth, though not the most evident one which now suggests
 itself, but far more dreadful, was taught me by this symbol.
</p><p>
 Again, my heart was a deep well of volatile blood, and into it buckets
 perpetually descended to be drawn up filled, and carried away by viewless
 hands to nurture the flames which writhed in the distant furnace.  Through
 all this time I was witnessing one more tremendous truth.  But one of the
 representatives still retains its full significancy to my mind, and is
 communicable also to others.
</p><p>
 Standing upon a mountain peak appeared a serene old prophet, whose face was
 radiant with a divine majesty.  In his look, his form, his manner, was
 embodied all that glorifies the sage; wonderfully did he typify the ideal of
 the bard —
</p><blockquote><a href="Notes/n01095.html" target="bottom">
	“His open eyes desire the truth;<br />
	&nbsp;The wisdom of a thousand years<br />
	&nbsp;Is in them.”
</a></blockquote><p>
 All that science, art, and spotless purity of life can do to ennoble
 humanity, had ennobled him, and I well-nigh knelt down before him in an
 ecstasy of worship.  A voice spoke to me from the infinitudes, “Behold man’s
 soul in primeval grandeur; as it was while yet he talked with God.”
</p><p>
 Hurried away through immensity, I came, somewhere in the universe, upon a low
 knoll, flaunting in a growth of coarse and gaudy flowers.  Half way down its
 slope sat a hideous dwarf, deformed in body, but still much more terrible in
 the soul, which ogled me through his leaden eyes, or broke in ripples of
 idiotic laughter over his lax and expressionless lip.  One by one he
 aimlessly plucked the flowers among which he was sitting; he pressed them to
 his bosom, and leered upon them, as a maniac miser looks upon his treasures,
 and then, tearing to pieces their garish petals, tossed them into the air,
 and laughed wildly to see them whirling downward to strew his lap.  In horror
 I averted my face, but a strange fascination drew it back to him again, when
 once more the terrible voice sounded over my shoulder, “Behold thine own
 soul!”  In an agony I cried, “Why, oh why?”  Sternly, yet without a thrill of
 passion, the voice replied, “Thou hast perverted thy gifts, thou hast
 squandered thine opportunities, thou hast spurned thy warnings, and, blind to
 great things, thou playest with bawbles.  Therefore, behold thyself thus!”
</p><p>
 In speechless shame I hid my face and turned away.  Now, as with the descent
 of a torrent, all my violations of the principles which I saw revealed fell
 down upon my head from the heights of the Past.  It was no bewailing over the
 inexpediency of any deed or thought which I then uttered; from the abysses of
 my soul a cry of torture went up for discords which I had caused in the grand
 harmony of universal law.  The importance to mere temporal well-being of this
 act or that, made no difference in the inconceivable pain which I felt at its
 clear remembrance.  Whether, in the Past, I was confronted with a deliberate
 falsehood or a fictitious addition, for the sake of symmetry, to an otherwise
 true recital, the horror was the same.  It was not consequences to happiness
 that troubled me, but something of far mightier scope, for I looked upon some
 little pulse of evil which, at its time, had seemed to die away in the
 thought, and lo, in all the years since then it had been ceaselessly waving
 onward in consecutive circles, whose outer rim touched and invaded the
 majestic symphony of unalterable principles of Beauty and Truth.  Before the
 presence of that beholding there was no such thing as a little wrong in all
 the universe.
</p><p>
 And now, in review, there passed before my mind all those paradoxes of being
 which, to our natural sense, forever perplex the relations between God and
 Man — God, the omnipotent; Man, the free agent, the two concentric wheels of
 self-determining will which turn the universe.  How can these things be?
</p><p>
 In an instant I saw that hitherto unattainable How.  Out of the depths of
 mystery it broke forth and stood in grand relief upon its midnight veil.
 Between truths there was no longer any jar; as on a map, illustrated by
 eternal light, I beheld all their relative bearings, and in the conviction of
 an intuition cried out, “True, true, divinely true!”
</p><p>
 Do you ask me to give the process?  As well might I attempt to define sight
 to a being born without eyes as to image, even to myself, at this moment, the
 mode of that apocalypse.  Had memory of it as aught else than a fact remained
 to me, I had long since been consumed, as a red-hot needle dissolves away in
 oxygen.  As it is, I remember not the manner, except that it was Sight; at
 the moment it was incommunicable by any human language.  Yet the stamp of
 the intuition remains so indelibly upon my soul, that there is no
 self-evident truth which I could not more easily abjure than the undimmed and
 perfect harmony which, in that dreadful night, I beheld as an intuition.
</p><p>
 After this I suffered hellish agonies, prolonged through an infinity of
 duration.  As they were all embodied in symbols, I recall them but dimly, and
 the endeavor to relate them would be painful and profitless.
</p><p>
 At the end of my representative road, arriving through growing distances,
 times, and tortures, God-drawn, I was hurried back to be launched forward in
 the direction of the other, the celestial tendency.  The music of
 unimaginable harps grew clearer with every league of speed; symbols were
 turned to their most ravishing uses; the gleam of crystal gates and
 <a href="Notes/n23841.html" target="bottom">empyrean</a>
 battlements flashed on me with increasing radiance; the sky breathed down a
 balm which signified love, love — quenchless love.  At the end of this
 journey I arrived also; and, between towers of light, was about to pass
 through into a land resounding with infinite choruses of joy.  I was detained.
 Again the voice spake to me, “The thing is too great for thee; seek not to
 enter.  As thou wast preserved at the end of thy former way from going into
 the fires to which it led, so also now do I guard thee from beholding the
 fatal glories of the Divine face to face.”  With inconceivable grief I hid my
 face in my hands and returned, weeping bitterly.
</p><p>
 At this moment, for the first time since coming from my room, I became aware
 of the external world.  My friend still walked by my side, supporting me
 through the darkness.  We had not come
 <a href="Notes/n80298.html" target="bottom">half a mile</a>
 while I passed through all that awful vision!
</p><p>
 Presently we came to a short bridge.  Little conceiving the state of mind
 from which I had just emerged, Bob said to me, with the impression that the
 novelty of the idea would give me an attractive suggestion of adventure, “See
 <a href="Notes/n06875.html" target="bottom">the Styx</a>.”
 Groaning in spirit, I looked down upon that dark and sullen water which
 rolled below me, and saw it mightily expanded beneath horrible shadows toward
 a shore which glowed with the fires of my earlier vision.  “My God!” I cried,
 “am I again journeying toward the Infernal?  Yes, it must be so; for even
 this man, who has learned nothing of my past tortures, knows and tells me
 this is one of the rivers of Hell!”
</p><p>
 Bob caught a glimpse of the pain he had innocently caused me, and assured me,
 for the sake of my peace, that he had only been jesting.  “This is not the
 Styx at all,” said he, “but only a small stream which runs through
 Schenectady.”  By pointing out to me familiar surroundings, by persuasion, by
 entreaty, he at length prevailed upon me to cross the bridge; yet I only did
 so by concealing my eyes in his bosom and clasping his hands with the clutch
 of a vice.
</p><p>
 Supposing that light and the restorative influence of wine would relieve me,
 he led me to a restaurant, and there, sitting down with me to a table, called
 for a glass of Port.  In the unnatural shadow which inwrapped all things and
 persons, a man was standing near the door, and in the conversation which he
 was carrying on with another I heard him use the word “damn.”
</p><p>
 In an instant my mind, now exquisitely susceptible, took fire from that oath
 as tinder from steel.  “There is, indeed,” I soliloquized, “such a thing as
 damnation, for I have seen it.  Shall I be saved?”  This dreadful question
 forced me to determine it with an imperative fascination.  I continued.  “Oh
 thou Angel of Destiny, in whose
 <a href="Notes/n60506.html" target="bottom">book</a>
 all the names of the saved are written, I call on thee to open unto me the
 leaves!”
</p><p>
 Hardly had I spoken when upon a
 <a href="Notes/n71991.html" target="bottom">sable</a>
 pedestal of clouds the dread registrar sat before me, looking immeasurable
 pity from his superhuman eyes.  Silently he stretched out to me the great
 volume of record, and with devouring eyes I scanned its pages, turning them
 over in a wild haste that did not preclude the most rigid scrutiny.  Leaf
 after leaf flew back; from top to bottom I consumed them in my gaze of agony.
 Here and there I recognized a familiar name, but even my joy at such
 revelations took nothing from the cruelty of the suspense in which I looked
 to find my own.  With a face cold as marble I came to the last page, and had
 not found it yet.  Drops of torture beaded my brow as with eye and finger I
 ran down the final column.  One, two, three — I came to the bottom — the
 last.  It was not there!
</p><p>
 My God! nothing but thine upbearing arms at that moment kept me from eternal
 annihilation.  In stony horror I sat dumb.
</p><p>
 After the Angel of Destiny took back his book and shut it with the echo of
 doom, I know not what time elapsed while I dwelt in that unfathomable abyss
 of despair.  I saw Eternity, like a chariot out of which I had fallen, roll
 out of sight upon the bowed and smoking clouds to leave me, a creature of
 perdition, in an inanity of space and out of the successions of duration.
 Familiar faces were around me, yet the thought of obtaining relief from them
 never crossed my mind.  They were powerless to help a sufferer of the
 immortal pangs.
</p><p>
 If, as I sat at the table, a caldron of boiling lead had been brought in and
 set beside me, I would have leaped into it with exultant haste, to divert my
 mind from spiritual to physical sufferings.  Through a period which the
 hasheesh-eater alone can know, I sat speechlessly beside my friend.
</p><p>
 Suddenly upon the opposite wall appeared a cross, and Christ the Merciful was
 nailed thereon.  I sprang from my seat; I rushed toward him; I embraced his
 knees; I looked intensely into his face in voiceless entreaty.  That sad face
 sweetly smiled upon me, and I saw that my unspoken prayer was granted.
 Through my soul, as through a porous film, swept a wind of balm, and left it
 clean.  The voice that had attended me through all past journeyings, now
 changed from stern upbraiding to unimaginable love, spoke gently, “By the
 breath of the Spirit thine iniquities are borne utterly away.”  To colossal
 agonies peace as great succeeded, and, thus sustained, I returned to my room.
</p><p>
 Yet all my sufferings had not yet been fulfilled.  The moment that I reached
 home I threw myself down upon my bed.  Hardly had I touched it when, from all
 sides, devouring flame rolled upward and girt me in with a hemisphere of
 fire.  Shrieking, I leaped up and ran to my friends, who cared for me till
 the wrathful hallucination was overpast.
</p><p>
 At this day it seems to me almost incredible that I ever survived that
 experience at all.  Yet, inexplicable as it may be, when I awoke the next
 morning, I was as free from all traces of suffering as if I had been, all the
 evening previous, cradled in a mother’s arms.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter XI. The Book of Symbols</h2>
<p>
 Of all experiences in the hasheesh state, my indoctrination into spiritual
 facts through means of symbols was the most wonderful to myself.  In other
 visions I have reveled in more delicious beauty, and suffered horrors even
 more terrible; but in this I was lifted entirely out of the world of hitherto
 conceivable being, and invested with the power of beholding forms and modes
 of existence which, on earth, are impossible to be expressed, for the reason
 that no material emblems exist which even faintly foreshadow them.
</p><p>
 Among men we communicate entirely by symbols.  Upon any thought which has not
 its symbol in the Outer, “untransferable” is stamped indelibly.  A certain
 relation between two thoughts is beheld by one human mind.  How shall the man
 inform his neighbor of this relation?  There is no meatus for it through any
 of the labyrinths of material sense; it can not be seen, heard, felt, smelt,
 or tasted.  What is to be done?
</p><p>
 A flock of cranes are assembling from the four quarters of heaven to hold
 their aerial council on some tall crag above him.  Into our thinker’s mind
 flashes a bright idea.  Those birds shall mediate for his relation a passage
 into his brother’s understanding.  The cranes (grues) are coming together
 (con), and in this visible symbol he embodies his invisible relation, and the
 name henceforth that passes for it among men is
 <a href="Notes/n12447.html" target="bottom">“congruous.”</a>
</p><p>
 Yet there is one condition beyond the mere discovery of an apt symbol which
 is necessary before that symbol can be circulated as the bank-note which
 bases its security on the intangible coin within the spiritual treasury.
 That coin must be universally felt to exist, or the bill will be good for
 nothing.  In the present instance, the idea of the relation expressed by
 “congruous” must already have been perceived by the communicatee, or the
 communicator will be unable to express himself intelligibly.  Rather should
 we say, the idea of the possibility of this relation must exist before the
 former can perceive it; for, if he recognizes such a possibility, then, by
 virtue of this very capacity, he will immediately actualize the possible, and
 on the communication of the symbol perceive the idea of “congruity,” though
 it be for the first time.
</p><p>
 The question now arises, What state of mind lies back of, and conditions the
 capacity to recognize, through symbols, the mental phenomena of another?
 Plainly this: the two who are in communication must be situated so nearly
 upon the same plane of thought that they behold the same truths and are
 affected by the same emotions.  In proportion as this condition is violated
 will two men be unappreciating of each other’s inner states.
</p><p>
 Now in hasheesh it is utterly violated.  In the hasheesh-eater a virtual
 change of worlds has taken place, through the preternatural scope and
 activity of all his faculties.  Truth has not become expanded, but his vision
 has grown telescopic; that which others see only as the dim nebula, or do not
 see at all, he looks into with a penetrating scrutiny which distance, to a
 great extent, can not evade.  Where the luminous mist or the perfect void had
 been, he finds wondrous constellations of spiritual being, determines their
 bearings, and reads the law of their sublime harmony.  To his neighbor in the
 natural state he turns to give expression to his visions, but finds that to
 him the symbols which convey the apocalypse to his own mind are meaningless,
 because, in our ordinary life, the thoughts which they convey have no
 existence; their two planes are utterly different.
</p><p>
 This has not only occurred in my own case, but in several others — in persons
 upon whom I have experimented with hasheesh.  At their highest exaltation, so
 earnest has been the desire to communicate the burden which overpowered them,
 that they have spoken forth the symbols presented to their minds; yet from
 these symbols men around them, in the unexalted state, drew an entirely
 different significance from the true one, or, perceiving none at all, laughed
 at what was said as an absurdity, seeing nothing in the name of some ordinary
 thing or mode of being to excite such emotions of terror or ecstasy as were
 produced in the hasheesh-eater.  Yet many a time, as I stood near, by these
 symbols thus expressed, have I been able to follow the ecstatic wanderer, and
 recognize the exact place in his journey at which he had arrived as something
 which I had once seen myself.
</p><p>
 It is this process of symbolization which, in certain hasheesh states, gives
 every tree and house, every pebble and leaf, every footprint, feature, and
 gesture, a significance beyond mere matter or form, which possesses an
 inconceivable force of tortures or of happiness.
</p><p>
 Perhaps one of the most difficult things to convey to a mind not in the
 hasheesh delirium, by the symbols which there teach the manner of its
 process, or by any others, is the interchange of senses.  The soul is
 sometimes plainly perceived to be but one in its own sensorium, while the
 body is understood to be all that so variously modifies impressions as to
 make them in the one instance smell, in another taste, another sight, and
 thus on,
 <a href="Notes/n13980.html" target="bottom">ad finem</a>.
 Thus the hasheesh-eater knows what it is to be burned by <em>salt</em> fire,
 to <em>smell</em> colors, to <em>see</em> sounds, and, much more frequently,
 to <em>see</em> feelings.  How often do I remember vibrating in the air over
 a floor bristling with red-hot needles, and, although I never supposed I came
 in contact with them, <em>feeling</em> the sensation of their frightful
 pungency through <em>sight</em> as distinctly as if they were entering my
 heart.
</p><p>
 In the midst of sufferings unfathomable or raptures measureless, I often
 thought of St. Paul’s God-given trance, and the
 <a href="Notes/n50398.html" target="bottom">“ἄῤῥητα ῥήματα ἂ οὐκ ἐξὸν ἀνθρώπῳ λαλῆδαι.”</a> Never was I more
 convinced of any thing in my life than that our translation, “which it is not
 lawful for a man to utter,” is wholly inadequate.  It should be, “which it is
 impossible to utter to man;” for this alone harmonizes with that state of
 intuition in which the words are “speechless words,” and the truths beheld
 have no symbol on earth which will embody them.  Though far from believing
 that my own ecstasy, or that of any hasheesh-eater, has claim to such
 inspiration as an apostle’s, the states are still analogous in this respect,
 that they both share the nature of disembodiment, and the soul, in both,
 beholds realities of greater or less significance, such as may never be
 apprehended again out of the light of eternity.
</p><p>
 There is one thought suggested by the symbolization of hasheesh which I can
 not refrain from introducing here.  In some apocalyptic states of delirium
 like that which I have mentioned, and others succeeding it, there were
 symbols of an earthly nature used, which not only had never before conveyed
 to me such truth as I then saw, but never had expressed any truth at all.
 Things the least suspected of having any significance beyond their material
 agency were perceived to be the most startling illustrations and incarnations
 of spiritual facts.
</p><p>
 Now where, among created things, shall we set the boundaries to this capacity
 for symbolizing.  In view of that which I saw, especially upon the last
 detailed memorable night, I felt, and still feel, forced to the conclusion
 that there is no boundary.  If, as the true philosopher must believe, the
 material was created for the spiritual, as the lower for the higher, the
 means for the end, it is impossible that any minutest lichen should exist as
 mere inert matter, lessonless to the soul of all creation’s viceroy — man.
</p><p>
 What a world of symbols, then, lie sleeping in expectancy of the approaching
 times which shall bring some translator to their now unnoticed sermons, and
 bid them speak of unconceived beauties and truths!
</p><p>
 Following out the perverted tendencies of a pseudo-science, we are now
 forever seeking some reason for the existence of the outer world as it is,
 which will utterly insphere it within the ends of material well-being.
 Plainly perceiving that respect for the Creative Wisdom will not permit us to
 suppose that any thing, however microscopic, has been made aimlessly, we
 belabor our brains with attempts to find out some physical good arising out
 of the being of every object in all the terrene kingdoms.  Such a thing was
 created that man might be cured of the headache; such another, that his food
 might be varied; still another, that a convenient circulating medium might be
 in his power.  Doubtless such corporeal goods were among the final causes of
 some portions of the creation.  Our trouble is not our activity in the
 discovery of these, but that beyond their petty circle discovery does not
 dare to set her foot, for fear of being called visionary.
</p><p>
 Doubtless, when God has lent us a tenement to lodge in, albeit for a few days
 and nights, it is our duty to find out and apply all those materials of
 repair which will keep it in good order till we pass finally from its low
 door-step into our palace; as honorable tenants, and for the sake of our own
 better preservation, this is both duty and right, so far as it may be done
 without bespangling and frescoing our wayfaring house as if it were to be our
 perpetual home.  Yet what effort can be meaner, what more unworthy of Spirit,
 than studiously to degrade the whole sublime Kosmos into one colossal eating-house, wardrobe, or doctor’s shop for the body?  Good men, perhaps wise men,
 are forever looking for something medicinal in the scorpion, or edible in the
 fungus, to vindicate God’s claim to an intention.  Most ingeniously do they
 fabricate suppostitious purposes for outer things; hopelessly writhe in the
 folds of perplexity when, with all their far-fetched hypotheses, they can not
 see what material good is to come out of some obstinate resistant to their
 analysis.
</p><p>
 Blind philosophers!  Nature refuses to cramp herself within your impossible
 law; she rejects your generalization; she throws off the shackles of your
 theory!  For the sake of mere physical well-being, it had doubtless been far
 better that never a centipede had been created; that the most formidable
 snake had been the harmless garter; that the
 <a href="Notes/n44100.html" target="bottom">euphorbus</a>
 had never put forth a leaf, nor the
 <a href="Notes/n84501.html" target="bottom">seleniuret</a>
 a vapor.  Yet this is not the grand aim of the system of things, but that man
 might, for the present, have symbols for the communication of manly thought;
 that God himself, for the future, might have symbols for the revelation of
 Divine Truth, when, in the grand unveiling, rocks, trees, and rivers — yea,
 the smallest atom also — shall come thronging up along all the ways of the
 Universe to unseal their long-embosomed messages, and join in the choral
 dance of the Spiritual — the only science — to the
 <a href="Notes/n14538.html" target="bottom">Orpheus-music</a>
 of the awakened soul.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter XII. To-day, <a href="Notes/n01194.html" target="bottom">Zeus</a>;
to-morrow, <a href="Notes/n56936.html" target="bottom">Prometheus</a>.</h2>
<p>
 At what precise time in my experience I began to doubt the drug being, with
 me, so much a mere experiment as a fascinating indulgence, I do not now
 recollect.  It may be that the fact of its ascendency <em>gradually</em>
 dawned upon me; but, at any rate, whenever the suspicion became definite, I
 dismissed it by so varying the manner of the enjoyment as to persuade myself
 that it was experimental still.
</p><p>
 I had walked, talked, and dreamed under the hasheesh influence; I would now
 listen to music and see acting, that, under such circumstances, I might note
 the varying phenomena, if any occurred.
</p><p>
 To reach New York for the purpose I would go by water, sailing down the
 glorious Hudson under the full moon; and this would still be another
 opportunity for experimenting.
</p><p>
 Upon one of the largest and most beautiful of the steamers which ever glided
 down the shining pathway of the river upon a moonlight night of summer, I
 stepped, at eight o’clock in the evening, accompanied by several of my
 friends, and carrying in my pocket a box of boluses.  The gang-plank was
 drawn in, and we were on our way.
</p><p>
 In the few moments which elapsed before the steward appeared, brandishing his
 noisy harbinger of things edible, I managed to swallow, unseen, a number of
 the spheroids contained in my box.
</p><p>
 On regaining the deck from that savory, subaqueous cavern where, amid
 sepulchral lights, five hundred Americans of us had, for the incredible space
 of fifteen minutes, been fiercely elbowing each other in insane haste to
 secure that grand national end, indigestion, we found the broad disk of the
 moon just above the horizon, and, on arm-chairs taken forward, sat down, with
 our toes thrust into the bulwark-netting, for our
 <a href="Notes/n04985.html" target="bottom">post-cœnatial</a>
 smoke.  Cigars and studently habits of thinking impelled us toward song, and
 for two hours, at least, the low rocks which skirt the upper channel echoed
 with
 <a href="Notes/n52140.html" target="bottom">“There is music in the air,”</a>
 <a href="Notes/n10100.html" target="bottom">“Co-ca-che-lunk,”</a>
 and other collegiate harmonies.
</p><p>
 The Opera, with its glory of lights, passionate song, orchestral crashes, and
 scenery, whirls the soul on with it, indeed, in a bewildering dance of
 delight; the ballad we love, sung feelingly by the woman we love, at that
 hour when to lift the curtains would only let in more twilight, is a calm
 rapture which is good for the heart; if it be not too near, the bugle
 discourses rich melody and spirit-stirring among the mountains of its birth;
 yet, beyond all other music, grant me a song trolled from manly throats,
 which keep good chord and time, and first learned within those homely walls
 which, to the true American collegian, are dearer than all the towers of
 Oxford.
</p><p>
 Reverend Union! it is not thine to deck thyself in the outworn trappings of
 feudal pomp; not even is it thine to bear upon thy brow the wrinkles of
 unnumbered years, though long before thou lackest such prestige its sign
 shall come upon thee.  Thou hast no high places for lineage nor fat tables
 for gold; thou art beautiful neither in marble nor carved workmanship.  Yet
 art thou the mother of thinkers and workers — high souls and brave hearts,
 which make their throb felt in the giant pulses of a great nation.  To these
 <a href="Notes/n83129.html" target="bottom">Gracchi</a>
 of thine dost thou point and say, “Behold my jewels.”  With the love
 of thy sons thou art crowned more royally than turrets might crown thee; and
 better than all the remembrance of coronets upon thy calendar and ermine in
 thy halls is the thought that, grasping thy protectress hand, merit hath so
 often struggled up to fame out of the oblivion of namelessness and the clutch
 of poverty.
</p><p>
 It is in the American college, with its freedom from fictitious distinctions,
 its rejection of all odious badges, which set genealogy and money over mind
 and heart; its inculcation of manly self-government rather than the fear of
 tyrannic espionage; its unrestrained intercourse between congenial souls, and
 its grouping of congenialities by society bonds, that the most perfect
 development of the social and individual man takes place.  Here it is that,
 by attrition of minds, unworthy eccentricities are rubbed off, while the
 personal and characteristic nature of the man is solidified and polished into
 higher symmetry.  And here, last, though far from least, among all the true
 purposes of education, the heart gets its due in the attainment of those
 unworldly associations which, many a year after the actual presences which
 they symbolize have dropped down into the “long ago,” send up the hallowed
 savor of friendship and disinterestedness through the dust and cobwebs which
 choke well-nigh every other memory.
</p><p>
 It is not wonderful that, out of such free and intimate converse among young
 men as we find in our colleges, song should spring up as a most legitimate
 and accredited progeny.  He who should collect the college carols of our
 country, or, at least, those of them whose spice would not be wholly lost in
 the transplantation from their original time and place, would be adding no
 mean department to the national literature.  Piquant, fresh-imaged,
 outwelling, and sitting snug to their airs,
 <a href="Notes/n16078.html" target="bottom">they are frequently both excellent poetry and music</a>.
 Whether they ring through the free air of a balmy summer evening from a row
 of sitters on a terrace or a green, who snatch fragrant puffs of old Virginia
 between staves, or gladden a college room through the long evenings of
 winter, they are always inspiriting, always heart-blending, and always, I may
 add, well sung.
</p><p>
 I have rambled round the complete circle of my digression to the place where
 I left my friends seated upon the forward deck and singing in the incipient
 moonlight.  By the time that we had grown tired of singing, the river was
 very beautiful with the clear reflection of the sky, turning the spray of our
 prow to silver beads, and giving still snowier lustre to our wake.  The
 excitement of music had put off that of hasheesh, but I was not surprised to
 feel the well-known thrill as our voices died away.
</p><p>
 In a moment I became the fairy monarch.  Etherealized and beautified, I was
 gliding upon my will-borne pleasure-vessel through the moonlit kingdom over
 which I was supreme.  Now whippoorwills chanted me a plaintive welcome from
 the dreamy, wooded shores; fire-flies illuminated, with triumphal lights,
 their palace fronts among the shadowy elms; and the little moon-glorified
 islands, that caught our waves upon their foreheads, sent back a delicious
 voice of laud and joy.
</p><p>
 In this ecstasy I sat reviewing my domain until the moon stood at the zenith,
 and then pacing through the long saloons, I reveled in the ownership of
 gorgeous tapestry and panelings, and from the galleries looked proudly upon
 my retinue of beautiful women and brave men who sat or walked below.
</p><p>
 When I shut my eyes I dwelt in a delicious land of dreams.  Charging at the
 head of ever-victorious legions, I drove millions of laughing foes in playful
 rout through an illimitable field of roses.  Down the mountains of Congo a
 whole universe of lithe and shapely negro children ran leaping, with their
 arms full of elephants’ tusks, boxes of gold-dust, and fresh cocoanuts, to be
 the purveyors of my palace.  On the wings of a speechless music I floated
 through the air, and in the cloud-valleys played hide-and-seek with meteors.
</p><p>
 A little after midnight I felt the hasheesh effects decreasing, and not
 having yet recognized that law of the drug which forbids prolonging its
 dreams by a second dose (nor, indeed, did I recognize it until several bitter
 experiences had taught me), I took
 <a href="Notes/n89516.html" target="bottom">five grains</a> more.
</p><p>
 Gradually more and more the hasheesh influence wore off.  I went to my
 state-room, and now, perfectly restored to the natural state, lay down, and
 all night slept quietly.
</p><p>
 Upon awaking with the early sunlight I found that we were midway past the
 <a href="Notes/n62332.html" target="bottom">Palisades</a>.
 Upon the eastern bank of the river the signs of suburban life had become
 visible in terraces, lawns, and verandas, and bells were audible down the bay.
</p><p>
 It was not until we reached the pier that I felt the effect of my last bolus.
 I stepped ashore, and, for the first time, separated for a season from my
 fellow-voyagers.  The morning already gave most earnest promise of a day
 which was to be one of the hottest of summer, and as I walked up that
 unsheltered quay alone, and with the sun streaming full upon me, I suddenly
 felt my heart catch fire.  There was no premonitory, no mystery, no thrill;
 and this gave a more terrible tone to my suffering, for I burned among
 acknowledged and familiar realities without the possibility of remembering
 any former state of a calmer nature upon which to steady myself.
</p><p>
 Most fully did I then realize the hell of
 <a href="Notes/n55983.html" target="bottom">Eblis</a>
 and its inextinguishable pangs, as, walking through the thronged streets of
 the great city, I laid my hand upon my heart to hide its writhings, and saw
 in every face of the vast multitude who hurried past tokens of something
 despairing and diabolic.  The well-known long rows of palatial shops and
 gaudy windows swept by me as I paced along.  The hurrying crowds of men upon
 the pavement who went to their businesses, and the fluctuating stream of
 carriages and omnibuses which rolled down the street, seemed, in their mere
 matter, nothing unusual to me.  Yet the spirit which pervaded all things was
 that of the infernal.  I wandered through a colossal city of hell, where all
 men were pursuing their earthly tendencies amid pomp and affluence as great
 as ever, yet stamped upon their foreheads with the dreadful sign of all hope
 of better things forever lost.
</p><p>
 At all times the thoroughfare of a large town is a wilderness to me.  In
 desert loneliness, on mountain tops, or by the side of an unfrequented
 stream, there is no such hermit conceivable as the hermit of a crowd.  The
 study of character in faces, of universal human nature in its elbowings and
 windings toward its aim, may be pursued upon a city’s pave to the greatest
 advantage; yet overtopping all the external aspects of society found there is
 the solitude which inspheres the wanderer within himself, as he perceives not
 one being within the
 <a href="Notes/n15270.html" target="bottom">distance of miles</a>
 to whom he is bound by any dearer interest than our common humanity.
</p><p>
 But at this time how singularly, how especially was I a hermit!  Still
 conscious of retaining some of the attributes of a man, I was surrounded by
 infernal forms and features, shaped, indeed, like my own, but with the
 good-will, the hope, the confidence of our common life forever evaporated
 from them.  Every one of the beings that hastened by me in hum and tumult
 looked under his eyebrows, with dreadful superstition, at his neighbor and at
 me.  The ideal of hell, where all faith hath perished, and in endless
 mutation of couples the wretched sneer and glare at each other continually,
 was realized in that scene.
</p><p>
 I could not bear the pavement, and so stepped into an omnibus, that I might
 behold less of that terrible ebb and flow of Life in Death.  As we rolled
 heavily over the stones of the street, I felt my heart transferred to some
 flinty road-bed, a fathom below the surface, where it writhed beneath the jar
 of wheels, and the puncture of the cruel rock-fragments yet communicated all
 its sufferings to me by slender cords of conduction, whose elastic fibre
 stretched more and more as we rode on, and grew tenser with an unutterable
 pain.  At the same time, all my fellow-passengers in the omnibus seemed
 staring at me with hot and searching eyes; in one corner I cowered from their
 glance, and sat with my hand upon my face.  They whispered; it was myself of
 whom they talked, and I distinctly heard them use the word “hasheesh.”
</p><p>
 I got out of the omnibus and again took the pavement, realizing that there
 was nowhere any relief for my pangs.  It would be vain to detail all the
 horrors through which I passed before I took shelter in the house of a
 friend.  Among them not the least were a heart on fire, a brain pierced by a
 multitude of revolving augers, and the return, amid dim inner flames, of the
 fearful symbolization and the demon-songs of former visions.
</p><p>
 Arriving at my friend’s, I pleaded fatigue, and lay down.  Hours were
 wretchedly passed in falling asleep, and then darting up in terror at some
 ideal danger.  Sometimes a gnashing maniac looked at me, face to face, out of
 the darkness; sometimes into rayless caverns I fell from the very heavens;
 sometimes the lofty houses of an unknown city were toppling over my head in
 the agonies of an earthquake.  Agonies, I say, for their throes seemed like
 human sufferings.
</p><p>
 Out of this woe I emerged entirely by noon, but began to be aware that I
 should never again, in the hasheesh state, be secure in the certainty of
 unclouded visions.  The cup had been so often mingled, that its savor of
 bitterness would never wholly pass away.  Yet ascribing all the pain which,
 in this instance, I had endured, to some unfavorable state of the body (I had
 not yet realized the law of a second dose), I supposed that, by preserving a
 general healthy tone of the system, hasheesh might be used harmlessly.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>
Chapter XIII.
<a href="Notes/n51187.html" target="bottom">Eidola Theatri</a>
and the Prince of Whales.
</h2>
<p>
 Waiting until the next day at evening I took a moderate bolus, say
 <a href="Notes/n34940.html" target="bottom">twenty-five grains</a>,
 and repaired to the theatre.
</p><p>
 In the action of the pieces which were performed I lived as really as I had
 ever lived in the world.  With the fortunes of a certain adventurer in one of
 the plays my mind so thoroughly associated me that, when he was led to the
 block and the headsman stood over him, I nerved myself for the final stroke,
 and waited to feel the steel crash through my own neck.  He was reprieved,
 and, in his redemption, it was I who exulted.
</p><p>
 The effect of some rich-toned frescoing above the stage was to make me
 imagine myself in heaven.  Yet “imagine” is not the proper word, for it does
 not express the cloudless conviction of reality which characterized this
 vision.  There were no longer any forms or faces visible below me, but out of
 the wondrous rosy perspective of the upper paneling angels came gliding, as
 through corridors hewn of ruby, and showered down rays of music, which were
 also beheld as rays of color.
</p><p>
 A most singular phenomenon occurred while I was intently listening to the
 orchestra.  Singular, because it seems one of the most striking illustrations
 I have ever known of the preternatural activity of sense in the hasheesh
 state, and in an analytic direction.
</p><p>
 Seated side by side in the middle of the orchestra played two violinists.
 That they were playing the same part was evident from their perfect
 uniformity in bowing; their bows, through the whole piece, rose and fell
 simultaneously, keeping exactly parallel.  A chorus of wind and stringed
 instruments pealed on both sides of them, and the symphony was as perfect as
 possible; yet, amid all that harmonious blending, I was able to detect which
 note came from one violin and which from the other as distinctly as if the
 violinists had been playing at the distance of
 <a href="Notes/n10986.html" target="bottom">a hundred feet</a>
 apart, and with
 no other instruments discoursing near them.
</p><p>
 According to a law of hasheesh already mentioned, a very ludicrous
 hallucination came in to relieve the mind from its tense state.  Just as the
 rapture of music, lights, and acting began to grow painful from excess, I
 felt myself losing all human proportions, and, spinning up to a tremendous
 height, became
 <a href="Notes/n69530.html" target="bottom">Cleopatra’s Needle</a>.
</p><p>
 A man once remarked to young
 <a href="Notes/n46500.html" target="bottom">Dumas</a>,
 “My poor friend, M. Thibadeau, returned home, took off his spectacles, and
 died.”  “Did he take off his spectacles first?” asked Dumas.  “Yes, truly,”
 replied the other; “but why?”  “Merely how delightful it must have been to be
 spared the grief of seeing himself die!”
</p><p>
 About as absurd a duality as that inferred for Monsieur Thibadeau, if he had
 kept on his spectacles, was the duality with which I looked up and saw my own
 head some
 <a href="Notes/n10986.html" target="bottom">hundred feet</a>
 in the air.  Suddenly a hasheesh-voice rang clearly in
 my ear, “Sit still upon thy base, Eternal Obelisk!”  Ah me! I had not
 realized till then how necessary it was that I should preserve the centre of
 gravity.  What if I should go over?  One motion on this side or that, and
 dire destruction would overwhelm the whole parquette.  From my lofty top I
 looked down upon responsible fathers of families; innocent children; young
 maidens, with the first peach-bloom of womanhood upon their cheeks; young
 men, with the firelight of ambitious enterprise new-kindled in their eyes.
 There was absolutely no effort which I was unwilling to make to save them
 from destruction.  So I said to myself, “Be a good obelisk and behave
 yourself, old fellow; keep your equilibrium, I entreat you.  You don’t want
 to clothe all the families of New York in mourning, I know you don’t; control
 yourself, I beg.”  Bold upright and motionless I sat, until it pleased the
 gods to alter my shape, most opportunely, when I was just giving out, to the
 far more secure pyramid, after which all hallucinations gently passed away.
</p><p>
 The hasheesh state, in its intensest forms, is generally one of the wildest
 insanity.  By this I do not mean to say that the hasheesh-eater at such a
 season necessarily loses his self-control, or wanders among the incoherent
 dreams of a lawless fancy, for neither of these propositions is true.  As I
 have heretofore remarked, self-government during the delirium, from being at
 first apprehended as a necessity, grows up at length into a habit, and the
 visions that appear before the shut or open eyes of the ecstatic have an
 orderly progress and a consistent law according to which they are informed,
 which elevate them above the prodigal though meaningless displays of fancy
 into the highest sphere of imagination.
</p><p>
 Yet, after all, there are reasons for calling the state an insanity, and a
 wild insanity, which will defend the name to all who can realize them from a
 description, and far more completely to those who have known them by
 experiment.
</p><p>
 In the first place, when self-control has reached its utmost development, and
 the tortured or exultant spirit restrains itself from all eruptive paroxysms
 of communication among those people to whom its secret would be unwisely
 imparted, there is still a sense of perfect passivity to some Titanic force
 of life, which, for good or evil, must work on through its seeming eternity.
 Hurried through sublimest ascending paths, or whirled downward through
 ever-blackening infinitudes, longing for a
 <a href="Notes/n66003.html" target="bottom">Lemnos</a>
 where the limbs may rebound from solid ground, even though shattered by the
 shock, there is no relief for the soul but to endure, to wait, and through a
 time of patience but faintly imaged by
 <a href="Notes/n26472.html" target="bottom">the nine days of the headlong Hephæstus</a>.
 When the
 <a href="Notes/n58817.html" target="bottom">Afreet</a>
 who was of old your servant becomes your lord, he is as deaf to petitions as
 you were avaricious in your demand for splendors.
</p><p>
 Again: at the moment of the most rapturous exultation, the soul hears the
 outcry of the physical nature pouring up to its height of vision out of the
 walls of flesh, and the burden of that cry is, “I am in pain; I am finite,
 though thou art infinite!”  The cords which bind the two mysterious portions
 of our duality together have been stretched to their ultimate tensity, and
 the body, for the sake of its own existence, calls the soul back into the
 husk which it can not carry with it.  Oftentimes, in the presence of the most
 ravishing views, have I felt these cords pulling me downward with as distinct
 a sensation as if they were real sinews, and, compelled to ask the question
 “Is this happiness or torture?” soul and body have returned opposite
 verdicts.
</p><p>
 These two facts constitute hasheesh a most tremendous form of insanity.
</p><p>
 At intervals, however, in the enchanted life which I led under the influence
 of the drug, there occurred seasons of a quieter nature than the ravishment
 of delirium, when my mind, with a calm power of insight, penetrated into some
 of its own kingdoms, whose external boundaries only it had known before,
 reflected, marveled, and took notes as serenely as a philosophic voyager.
</p><p>
 In the department of philological discovery I sometimes reveled for hours,
 coming upon
 <a href="Notes/n97403.html" target="bottom">clews</a>
 to the geneaology of words and unexpected affinities
 between languages, which, upon afterward recalling them (though only in a few
 cases was I able to do this), I generally found substantiated by the
 authorities of science, or, if they had not before been perceived by any
 writers who I had at hand, at least bearing the stamp of a strong probability
 of correctness.
</p><p>
 I mention but one of them as with me merely conjectural, for it bases its
 plausibility upon a root in the Sanscrit, with which language I do not
 pretend to be acquainted.
</p><p>
 I remembered during one of these calm, suggestive states that the Latin
 <i>cano</i> (to sing) and <i>candeo</i> (to shine) were supposed to derive
 their origin from a common Sanscrit root, whose signification was “to dart
 forth, as the sun his rays of light.”  The thought struck me, Might not other
 vocal utterance than singing be found cognate with the out-darting of light
 also? I would see.  The Latin “fari,” “to speak,” referred me back to its
 Greek equivalent, φάναι.  The verb “to shine” was “φαίνειν”
 So far, in sound at least, the two
 were affiliated.  It now occurred to me that “φως” was both
 “a light” and “man,” in his prerogative of speech, with a slight
 variation of accent in the different cases.  I had here four words (dividing
 the last by its two meanings), all of whose original roots must have been
 something very nearly like φα-.  On referring to authorities, I
 found that the fountain-head of the Greek “φαίνω”
 is supposed to be the Sanscrit “bhâ,” “to shine forth.”  Following out
 the result of my previous argument, I connected all the words with this root,
 and in this conjecture saw both light and speech as effluences from Brahm, the
 great giver of all radiance, and man not merely an effluence from him, but, in
 virtue of speech, a “shiner” also, a reflector of Him from whose radiance he
 came, and into whose glory he should be absorbed.  Now all this process (be
 its result true or false) was accomplished internally in a hundredth part of
 the time which it will take to read it — nay, almost instantaneously, and
 with a sense of delight in the mental activity which carried it on such as
 the creation of his highest ideal by an artist gives him when he stands mute
 before his marble.
</p><p>
 Another field through which I sometimes wandered was sown with those
 sound-relations between words which constitute
 <a href="Notes/n60363.html" target="bottom">the pun</a>.
 For hours I walked aching with laughter in this land of
 <a href="Notes/n44378.html" target="bottom">Paronomasia</a>,
 where the whole Dictionary had arrayed itself in strophe and antistrophe, and
 was dancing a ludicrous chorus of quirk and quibble.  If
 <a href="Notes/n95827.html" target="bottom">Hood</a>
 had been there, the notes which he would have taken had supplied him with
 materials for the Comic Annuals of a cycle.  Rarely did the music of a deeper
 wit intermingle with the rattling fantasies of the pun-country; never was any
 thing but the broad laugh heard there, and the very atmosphere was crazy with
 oxygen.  Were it possible to transport to a country such as this those grave
 professors of the moralities who have been convicted of contempt of the court
 of Mirth, and high treason to the King of Misrule, how delightful would it be
 to behold their iron diaphragms vibrating perforce, and the stereotyped
 downward curves at the corners of their mouths reversed until they encroached
 upon the boundaries of their juiceless cheeks!  But, in hasheesh states,
 temperament and previous habit so much decide tendencies, that the
 transport-ship which bore these convicts would float inevitably to the mouth
 of
 <a href="Notes/n89183.html" target="bottom">Acheron</a>,
 or strand midway upon some reef upraised by a million of
 <a href="Notes/n19227.html" target="bottom">zoophytic Duns Scotuses</a>.
</p><p>
 Out of the number of double-entendres which appeared to me (and they probably
 amounted to thousands), I recollect but very few.  To recall them all would
 be nearly, if not quite as difficult as to remember the characteristics of
 each separate wheat-head in a large harvest-field after having but once
 passed through it.  I give two of them.
</p><p>
 A youth, not at all of that description which
 <a href="Notes/n51212.html" target="bottom">“maketh a glad father,”</a>
 was seen standing at the counter of a gaudy restaurant.  Glass after glass of
 various exhilarating compounds was handed to him by the man in waiting, and
 as quickly drained.  I did not observe that the genius of decanters received
 any compensation for the liquors consumed from the young man who demanded
 them, and modestly asked him how he had been induced to purvey to the
 drinker’s thirst on so liberal a scale.  With arms akimbo, and casting upon
 me a most impressive look, the official replied, “Like the man in
 Thanatopsis, I am
</p><center>
 <a href="Notes/n62358.html" target="bottom">“‘Sustained by an unfaltering <em>trust</em>.’”</a>
</center><p>
 Upon the steps of the post-office stood another young man, who had been
 disappointed in a remittance from the parental treasury.  “What are you doing
 there?” I asked.  “I am waiting patiently
 <a href="Notes/n50507.html" target="bottom">until my <em>change</em> come</a>.”
</p><p>
 Occasionally there intervened between the vagaries of pun and double-entendre
 some display of comic points in human nature, which were as amusing as the
 puns themselves.  For instance, I remember the representation to me of a man
 of remarkable self-esteem, who happened, as he sat in my presence, to appease
 the irritation of his scalp with his digit.  Just then a peal of thunder
 shook the sky above us.  “Heavens!” cried our friend, “to think that it
 should thunder because a man scratched his head!”
</p><p>
 I feel that these things lose very much of their original effervescence in
 the relation, for at the time they none of them seemed so much told to me as
 acted before me; nor was it the action of a stage, but of a vivified picture,
 where fun, in all its myriad mutations, was embodied to sight, and the joke
 was as much apprehended by the eye as by the feeling.  Every gesture of the
 figures that passed before me told more of raillery than tongue could utter,
 and it was this fact that sometimes made pantomime upon the stage a perfect
 feast of mirth to me as I sat seeing it in the appreciative state induced by
 hasheesh.  At such seasons, not the faintest stroke of humor in look or
 manner escaped me, and I no doubt often committed that most gross error in
 any man, laughing when my neighbors saw fit not to be moved.
</p><p>
 At one time, in my ramble through the realm of incongruities, I came to the
 strand of the Mediterranean, and beheld an acquaintance of mine standing
 close beside the water.  With a tourist’s knapsack upon his back, and a stout
 umbrella in his hand, to serve the double purpose of a walking-stick, he drew
 near and accosted me.  “Will you go with me,” said he, “to make a call upon a
 certain old and valued friend?”
</p><p>
 “Most willingly, if you will let me know his name.”
</p><p>
 “It is the
 <a href="Notes/n14816.html" target="bottom">Prophet Jonah, who still occupies submarine lodgings</a>
 in a situation, to be sure, rather cold and damp, yet commanding a fine
 <a href="Notes/n17654.html" target="bottom">water privilege</a>.”
 “There is nothing,” I replied, “which would please me more; but how is it to
 be accomplished?”  “Be patient, and you shall see.”  Just then a slight
 ripple ridged the surface of the sea, bubbles appeared, and then there
 followed them the black muzzle of Leviathan, who, with mighty strokes, pushed
 toward the shore.  Arriving there, his under jaw slid half way up the beach,
 and his upper jaw slowly rose like a trap-door, disclosing a fearful chasm of
 darkness within.  I looked down the throat of the beast, and beheld
 descending it a rickety wooden staircase, which was evidently the only
 feasible access to interior apartments.  Hardly would I have dared to trust
 myself to the tumble-down passage but for the importunate hand of my
 companion, which pressed me along beside him through the doorway and down the
 steps.  The monster let down his grisly portcullis behind us, and in total
 darkness we groped to the bottom of our way, where we emerged into the most
 shabby room that ever dawned upon the eyes of the visiting committee of a
 benevolent association.
</p><p>
 The central figure was an unutterably lean and woe-begone looking man, who,
 on a rush-bottomed chair, the only one in the room, sat mending his sole pair
 of unmentionables by the aid of a small needle-book which I was informed his
 mother had given him on leaving home.
</p><p>
 “Mr. Jonah, Mr. Fitz-Gerald,” said my friend, sententiously.  “Very happy to
 know Mr. Fitz-Gerald,” returned the seer; though, as I took his lank and
 ghostly fingers in mine, he looked the very antipodes of happy.  Decayed
 gentleman as he was, he shuffled around to do the honors of his mansion, and
 offered us the chair in which he had been sitting.  We refused to dispossess
 him, and took our seats upon the shaky pine table, which, with one battered
 brazen candlestick, holding
 <a href="Notes/n35914.html" target="bottom">an inch</a>
 of semi-luminous tallow, and a dog’s-eared copy of
 <a href="Notes/n06031.html" target="bottom">Watt’s Hymns</a>,
 also a gift from his mother, completed his inventory of furniture.
</p><p>
 “How do you like your situation?” asked my friend.
</p><p>
 “Leaky,” replied Jonah; “find the climate don’t agree with me.  I often wish
 I hadn’t come.”
</p><p>
 “Can’t you leave here when you want to?  I should think you would clear out
 if you find it uncomfortable,” said I to our entertainer.
</p><p>
 “I have repeatedly asked my landlord to make out his bill and let me go,”
 replied the gentleman; “but he isn’t used to casting up his prophets, and I
 don’t know when I <em>shall</em> get off.”
</p><p>
 Just then Leviathan, from the top of the stairs, by a strange introversion
 looked down into his own interiors, and in a hoarse voice called out to know
 whether we were going to stay all night, as he wanted to put down the
 shutters.
</p><p>
 “Be happy to give you a bed, gentlemen, but I sleep on the floor myself,”
 woefully murmured the poor seer.  “You mustn’t neglect to call on me if you
 ever pass through
 <a href="Notes/n62295.html" target="bottom">Joppa</a>,
 and — and — I ever get back myself.”  We wrung Jonah’s hand convulsively,
 rattled up the crazy stairs, and ran out upon the sand just as Leviathan was
 about shoving off into deep water.
</p><p>
 It may, perhaps, be hard to conceive how this incongruous element of the
 hasheesh visions should comport with all I have said upon the subject of
 those delicious raptures of beauty and sublime revealings of truth which
 break upon the mind under the influence of the drug.
</p><p>
 How, it will be asked, as oftentimes it has been asked me already, can you
 put any confidence in discoveries of unsupposed significancy in outer things,
 and wonderful laws of mental being, attained during the hasheesh state, when
 you have also beheld vagaries of fancy which Reason instantly pronounced
 absurd?  You do not believe that you really saw Jonah; how, then, can you
 believe that you saw truth?
</p><p>
 I would answer thus:  The domains of intuition and those of a wild fancy were
 always, in my visions, separated from each other by a clearly-defined and
 recognized boundary.  The congruous and the incongruous might alternate, but
 they never blended.  The light which illustrated the one was as different
 from that shed upon the other as a zenith sun is from lamplight.  Moreover,
 at the time of each specific envisionment, I beheld which faculty of mind was
 working as distinctly as in the simplest tests of his laboratory the chemist
 knows whether cobalt or litmus is producing a certain change of color.  The
 conviction of truth in the one case was like that of an axiom; in the other,
 such only as is drawn inferentially from mere sense.
</p><p>
 We very little realize in our daily life that there are two species of
 conviction felt at various times by every man, yet a moment’s reflection will
 show that it is so.  I look, for example, at a piece of silk, and pronounce
 it black; if I were now to turn away without any further inspection, I should
 not be at all astonished to hear afterward, from some one who had examined
 the fabric more closely and in a better light, that it was not black, as I
 had pronounced it, but a dark shade of blue.  I would be very willing to
 abjure my previous conviction, and, in this willingness, would show that I
 ascribed no absolute infallibility to the proofs of sense.  Yet if the same
 man should assure me that the silk was both wholly black and wholly blue at
 the same time, I should instantly reject his assertion as absurd, for the
 reason that it was a violation of the very law of possibility.  There would
 be no need of going back to test his truth, for it is denied by an entirely
 different conviction from that of sense — the conviction arising from an
 insight into necessary and universal law.
</p><p>
 Between the convictions of reality in the different hasheesh states, the
 boundary-lines are drawn even more distinctly than in the natural; and not
 only so, but the hasheesh-eater beholds those lines and acknowledges them, as
 the ordinary observer never does, from the fact that the practical wants of
 life make it convenient, nay, even imperative, that the data of sense should
 be treated as valid for the basis of action.  We have neither time nor power
 in our present day-labor to secure the same unerring verdict upon objects of
 sense which the axiom gives us upon objects of intuition.
</p><p>
 Nor is it necessary that in this life such a power should be possible.  In a
 former part of these pages we have suggested a reason why it would not be
 best for the soul, thus early in its career, to have its intuitional domain
 enlarged.  We may here, by another process, get at some of the final causes
 why this domain is just so large as it is.  We have a sufficient scope of
 intuition for all our earthly purposes.  Those truths are imparted to us as
 axioms which are necessary for the shaping of our habitual conduct.  In the
 thousands of constantly-recurring cases where, to direct our course wisely,
 it is necessary to know that a straight line is the shortest distance between
 two given points, that the whole is equal to its parts, and numerous similar
 facts, it would greatly hinder action were it necessary to take the rule and
 the balance into each specific consideration, and make a measurement
 according to sense.  These truths, therefore, stand before every man in a
 light which shows them to be universal and necessary; they are every where
 assented to upon their mere statement.  The animal is not God’s grand
 laborer, but man’s; <em>he</em>, therefore, needs no such faculty as
 intuition, the work of his little day requiring neither dispatch nor accuracy;
 and when he is impressed for human uses into the harness or the mill, the
 intuitions of his master guide him through the rein and the halter.
</p><p>
 Doubtless, as our field of action widens, our intuitional eyesight shall be
 increased also; not only because otherwise we should be mortified and
 saddened by our purblindness and the sense of making no progress proportional
 to the pace of our circumstances, but because God will never leave the
 workmen of his purposes hampered in their action among the colossal plans of
 the eternal building.
</p><p>
 There is one more fact to which I would advert in this rather rambling
 portion of my narrative, which characterizes the hasheesh state at times when
 it does not reach the height of delirium.  I refer to a lively appreciation
 of the feelings and manners of all people, in whatever lands and ages — a
 catholic sympathy, a spiritual cosmopolitanism.  Not only does this exhibit
 itself in affectionate yearnings toward friends that are about one, and an
 extraordinary insight into the excellencies of their characters, but, taking a
 wider sweep, it can understand and feel with the heroism of philanthropists
 and the enthusiasm of Crusaders.  The lamentation of the most ancient
 Thracian captive is a sincere grief to the dreamer, and the returning
 <a href="Notes/n36044.html" target="bottom">Camillus</a>
 brought no greater joy to Rome, as he threw his defiant sword into the scale,
 than over the chasm of ages he sends thrilling into the hasheesh-eater’s
 heart.  Whether it is the Past or the Present that is read or heard, he
 sorrows in all its woes and rejoices in all its rejoicings.  He understands
 all feelings; his mind is malleable to all thoughts; his susceptibilities run
 into the mould of all emotions.
</p><p>
 Sitting in this fused state of mind, I have heard the old ladies of the Latin
 time, as they sat gossiping over spindle and distaff, keep up their perpetual
 round of
 <a href="Notes/n94387.html" target="bottom">“inquit” and “papæ”</a>
 with as distinct and as kind appreciation as were they our own beloved
 American aunts and grandmothers, knitting after tea amid the interchange of
 “says he” and “do tell.”  For
 <a href="Notes/n61873.html" target="bottom">Epaminondas, coming glorious from Leuctra</a>,
 I could have hurrahed as enthusiastically as any Thebian of them all, or
 hobnobbed with Horace over his
</p><center>
 <a href="Notes/n75932.html" target="bottom">“Pocula veteris Massici”</a>
</center><p>
 with a true Roman zest and full-heartedness.  At such times no anachronism
 seems surprising; time is treated as an insignificant barrier to those souls
 who, in the element of their generous humanity, possess the only true bond of
 conjunction, and a bond which, though now so elastic that it permits years
 and leagues to keep souls apart, shall one day pull with a force strong
 enough to bring all congenialities together, in place as well as in state,
 and every man shall be with those whom, for their inner qualities, he has
 most deeply lived through all his life.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter XIV.  
<a href="Notes/n02238.html" target="bottom">Hail! Pythagoras</a></h2>
<center><table width="80%" border="1"><tr><td>
 <font color="#ff0000">NOTE: You can see where Ludlow reworked a portion of
 his earlier article
 <a href="../TheApocalypseOfHasheesh/index.html#chapter14">“The Apocalypse of
 Hasheesh”</a> to write this chapter.
</td></tr></table></center>
<p>
 The hemisphere of sky which walls us in is something more than a mere product
 of the laws of sight.  It is our shield from unbearable visions.  Within our
 little domain of view, girt by the horizon and arched by the dome of heaven,
 there is enough of sorrow, enough of danger, yes, enough of beauty and of
 mirth visible to occupy the soul abundantly in any one single beholding.
 That lesser and unseen hemisphere which bounds our hearing is also amply
 large, for within it echo enough of music and lamentation to fill all
 susceptibility to the utmost.  In this world we are but half spirit; we are
 thus able to hold only the perceptions and emotions of half an orb.  Once
 fully rounded into symmetry ourselves, we shall have strength to bear the
 pressure of influences from a whole sphere of truth and loveliness.
</p><p>
 It is this present half-developed state of ours which makes the infinitude of
 the hasheesh awakening so unendurable, even when its sublimity is the
 sublimity of delight.  We have no longer any thing to do with horizons, and
 the boundary which was at once our barrier and our fortress is removed, until
 we almost perish from the inflow of perceptions.
</p><p>
 One most powerful realization of this fact occurred to me when hasheesh had
 already become a fascination and a habit.  In the broad daylight of a summer
 afternoon I was walking in the full possession of delirium.  For an hour the
 expansion of all visible things had been growing toward its height; it now
 reached it, and to the fullest extent I apprehended what is meant by the
 infinity of space.  Vistas no longer converged; sight met no barrier; the
 world was horizonless, for earth and sky stretched endlessly onward in
 parallel planes.  Above me the heavens were terrible with the glory of a
 fathomless depth.  I looked up, but my eyes, unopposed, every moment
 penetrated farther and farther into the immensity, and I turned them downward,
 lest they should presently intrude into the fatal splendors of the Great
 Presence.  Unable to bear visible objects, I shut my eyes.  In one moment a
 colossal music filled the whole hemisphere above me, and I thrilled upward
 through its environment on visionless wings.  It was not song, it was not
 instruments, but the inexpressible spirit of sublime sound — like nothing I
 had ever heard — impossible to be symbolized; intense, yet not loud; the ideal
 of harmony, yet distinguishable into a multiplicity of exquisite parts.
</p><p>
 I opened my eyes, but it still continued.  I sought around me to detect some
 natural sound which might be exaggerated into such a semblance; but no, it was
 of unearthly generation, and it thrilled through the universe an inexplicable,
 a beautiful, yet an awful symphony.
</p><p>
 Suddenly my mind grew solemn with the consciousness of a quickened perception.
 And what a solemnity is that which the hasheesh-eater feels at such a moment!
 The very beating of his heart is silenced; he stands with his finger on his
 lip; his eye is fixed, and he becomes a very statue of awful veneration.  The
 face of such a man, however little glorified in feature or expression during
 his ordinary states of mind, I have stood and looked upon with the
 consciousness that I was beholding more of the embodiment of the truly sublime
 than any created thing could ever offer me.
</p><p>
 I looked abroad on fields, and waters, and sky, and read in them a most
 startling meaning.  I wondered how I had ever regarded them in the light of
 dead matter, at the farthest only <em>suggesting</em> lessons.  They were now,
 as in my former vision, grand symbols of the sublimest spiritual truths —
 truths never before even feebly grasped, and utterly unsuspected.
</p><p>
 Like a map, the
 <a href="Notes/n04904.html" target="bottom">arcana</a>
 of the universe lay bare before me.  I saw how every
 created thing not only typifies, but springs forth from some mighty spiritual
 law as its offspring, its necessary external development — not the mere
 clothing of the essence, but the essence incarnate.
</p><p>
 I am aware that, in this recital, I may seem to be repeating what I have said
 before of my dreadful night of insight; but between the two visions there was
 this difference, the view did not stop here.  While that music was pouring
 through the great heavens above me, I became conscious of a numerical order
 which ran through it, and in marking this order, I beheld it transferred to
 every movement of the universe.  Every sphere wheeled on in its orbit, every
 emotion of the soul arose and fell, every smallest moss and fungus germinated
 and grew according to some peculiarity of numbers which severally governed
 them, and was most admirably typified by them in return.  An exquisite
 harmony of proportion reigned through space, and I seemed to realize that the
 music which I heard was but this numerical harmony making itself objective
 through the development of a grand harmony of tones.
</p><p>
 The vividness with which this conception revealed itself to me made it a
 thing terrible to bear alone.  An unutterable ecstasy was carrying me away,
 but I dared not abandon myself to it.  I was no seer who could look on the
 unveiling of such glories face to face.
</p><p>
 An irrepressible yearning came over me to impart what I beheld, to share with
 another soul the weight of this colossal revelation.  With this purpose I
 scrutinized this vision; I sought in it for some characteristic which might
 make it translatable to another mind.  There was none.  In absolute
 incommunicableness it stood apart.  For it, in spoken language, there was no
 symbol.
</p><p>
 For a long time — how long a hasheesh-eater alone can know — I was in an
 agony.  I searched every pocket for my pencil and note-book, that I might at
 least set down some representative mark which would afterward recall to me
 the lineaments of my apocalypse.  They were not with me.  Jutting into the
 water of the brook along which I then wandered, and which, before and
 afterward, was my sole companion through so many ecstasies, lay a broad, flat
 stone.  “Glory in the highest!” I shouted, exultingly; “I will at least grave
 on this tablet some hieroglyph of what I feel.”  Tremblingly I sought for my
 knife; that, too, was gone!  It was then that, in a phrensy, I threw myself
 prostrate on the stone, and with my nails sought to make some memorial
 scratch upon it.  Hard, hard as flint!  In despair I stood up.
</p><p>
 Suddenly there came a sense as if some invisible presence walking the dread
 paths of the vision with me, yet at a distance, as if separated from my side
 by a long flow of time.  Taking courage, I cried, “Who has ever been here
 before me?  who, in years past, has shared with me this unutterable view?”
 In tones which linger with me to this day, a grand, audible voice responded
 <a href="Notes/n32707.html" target="bottom">“Pythagoras!”</a>
 In an instant I was calm.  I heard the footsteps of that sublime sage echoing
 upward through the ages, and in celestial light I read my vision unterrified,
 since it had burst upon his sight before me.
</p><p>
 For years previous I had been perplexed with his mysterious philosophy.  I
 saw in him an isolation from universal contemporary mind for which I could not
 account.  When the Ionic school was at the height of its dominance, he stood
 forth alone the originator of a system as distinct from it as the antipodes of
 mind.
</p><p>
 The doctrine of
 <a href="Notes/n39389.html" target="bottom">Thales</a>
 was built up by the uncertain processes of an obscure logic; that of
 Pythagoras seemed informed by intuition.  In his assertions there had always
 appeared to me a grave conviction of truth, a consciousness of sincerity
 which gave them a great weight, though I saw them through the dim refracting
 medium of tradition, and grasped their meaning imperfectly.  It was now given
 to see, in their own light, the truths which he set forth.  I also saw, as to
 this day I firmly believe, the source whence their revelation flowed.
</p><p>
 Tell me not that from Phœnicia he received the wand at whose signal the
 cohorts of
 <a href="Notes/n54146.html" target="bottom">the spheres</a>
 came trooping up before him in review, unveiling the eternal law and
 itinerary of their revolutions, and pouring on his spiritual ear that
 tremendous music to which they marched through space.  No.  During half a
 lifetime spent in Egypt and India, both mother-lands of this
 <a href="Notes/n28716.html" target="bottom">nepenthe</a>,
 doubt not that he quaffed its apocalyptic draught, and awoke, through its
 terrific quickening, into the consciousness of that ever-present and
 all-pervading harmony “which we hear not, because the coarseness of the daily
 life hath dulled our ear.”  The dim <a href="Notes/n67468.html" target="bottom">penetralia</a> of the
 <a href="Notes/n27799.html" target="bottom">Theban Memnonium</a>,
 or the silent spice-groves of the upper Indus, may have been the gymnasium of
 his wrestling with the mighty revealer; a priest or a gymnosophist may have
 been the first to anoint him with the
 <a href="Notes/n61318.html" target="bottom">palæstric oil</a>,
 but he conquered alone.  On the strange intuitive characteristics of his
 system; on the spherical music; on the government of all created things, and
 their development according to the laws of numbers; yes, on the very use of
 symbols, which could alone have force to the esoteric disciple (and a
 terrible significancy, indeed, has the simplest form to a mind
 hasheesh-quickened to read its meaning) — on all of these is the legible
 stamp of the hasheesh inspiration.
</p><p>
 It would be no hard task to prove, to a strong probability, at least, that
 the initiation to the Pythagorean mysteries, and the progressive instruction
 that succeeded it, to a considerable extent consisted in the employment,
 judiciously, if we may use the word, of hasheesh, as giving a critical and
 analytic power to the mind, which enabled the neophyte to roll up the murk and
 mist from beclouded truths till they stood distinctly seen in the splendor of
 their own harmonious beauty as an intuition.
</p><p>
 One thing related of Pythagoras and his friends has seemed very striking to
 me.  There is a legend that, as he was passing over a river, its waters
 called up to him, in the presence of his followers, “Hail! Pythagoras.”
 Frequently, while in the power of the hasheesh delirium, have I heard
 inanimate things sonorous with such voices.  On every side they have saluted
 me, from rocks, and trees, and waters, and sky; in my happiness filling me
 with intense exultation as I heard them welcoming their master; in my agony
 heaping nameless curses on my head as I went away into an eternal exile from
 all sympathy.  Of this tradition of
 <a href="Notes/n52280.html" target="bottom">Iamblichus</a>
 I feel an appreciation which almost convinces me that the voice of the river
 was indeed heard, though only by the quickened mind of some
 hasheesh-glorified esoterie.  Again, it may be that the doctrine of the
 metempsychosis was first communicated to Pythagoras by Theban priests; but the
 astonishing illustration which hasheesh would contribute to this tenet should
 not be overlooked in our attempt to assign its first suggestion and succeeding
 spread to their proper causes.
</p><p>
 A modern critic, in defending the hypothesis that Pythagoras was an impostor,
 has triumphantly asked, “Why did he assume the character of Apollo at the
 Olympic games?  Why did he boast that his soul had lived in former bodies, and
 that he had first been Æthalides, the son of Mercury, then Euphorbus,
 then Pyrrhus of Delos, and at last Pythagoras, but that he might more easily
 impose upon the credulity of an ignorant and superstitious people?”  To us
 these facts seem rather an evidence of his sincerity.  Had he made these
 assertions without proof, it is difficult to see how they would not have
 had a precisely contrary effect from that of paving the way to a more
 complete imposition upon popular credulity.  Upon our hypothesis it may
 be easily shown, not only how he could fully have believed these assertions
 himself, but also have given them a deep significance to the minds of
 his disciples.
</p><p>
 Let us see.  We will consider, for example, his assumption of the character of
 <a href="Notes/n51256.html" target="bottom">Phoebus</a>
 at the Olympic games.  Let us suppose that Pythagoras, animated with a desire
 of alluring to the study of his philosophy a choice and enthusiastic number
 out of that host who, along all the radii of the civilized world, had come up
 to
 <a href="Notes/n00281.html" target="bottom">the solemn festival at Elis</a>,
 had, by the talisman of hasheesh, called to his aid the magic of a
 preternatural eloquence; that while he addressed the throng, whom he had
 chained into breathless attention by the weird brilliancy of his eye, the
 unearthly imagery of his style, and the oracular insight of his thought, the
 grand impression flashed upon him from the very honor he was receiving, that
 he was the incarnation of some sublime deity.  What wonder that he burst into
 the acknowledgment of his godship as a secret too majestic to be hoarded up;
 what wonder that this sudden revelation of himself, darting forth in burning
 words and amid such colossal surroundings, went down with the accessories of
 time and place along the stream of perpetual tradition?
</p><p>
 If I may illustrate great things by small, I well remember many hallucinations
 of my own which would be exactly parallel to such a fancy in the mind of
 Pythagoras.  There is no impression more deeply stamped upon my past life than
 one of a walk along the brook which had so often witnessed my wrestlings with
 the hasheesh-afreet, and which now beheld me, the immortal Zeus, descended
 among men to grant them the sublime benediction of renovated life.  For this
 cause I had abandoned the serene seats of Olympus, the convocation of the
 gods, and the glory of an immortal kingship, while by my side Hermes trod the
 earth with radiant feet, the companion and dispenser of the beneficence of
 Deity.  Across lakes and seas, from continent to continent we strode; the
 snows of Hæmus and the Himmalehs crunched beneath our sandals; our
 foreheads were bathed with the upper light, our breasts glowed with the
 exultant inspiration of the golden ether.  Now resting on Chimborzao, I
 poured forth a majestic blessing upon all my creatures, and in an instant,
 with one omniscient glance, I beheld every human dwelling-place on the whole
 sphere irradiated with an unspeakable joy.
</p><p>
 I saw the king rule more wisely; the laborer return from his toil to a happier
 home; the park grow green with an intenser culture; the harvest-field groan
 under the sheaves of a more prudent and prosperous husbandry.  Adown blue
 slopes came new and more populous flocks, led by unvexed and gladsome
 shepherds; a thousand healthy vineyards sprang up above their new-raised sunny
 terraces; every smallest heart glowed with an added thrill of exultation, and
 the universal rebound of joy came pouring up into my own spirit with an
 intensity which lit my deity with rapture.
</p><p>
 And this was but a lay hasheesh-eater, mysteriously clothed in no
 <a href="Notes/n74819.html" target="bottom">Pallas-woven</a>,
 philosophic stole, who, with his friend, walked out into the fields to enjoy
 his delirium among the beauties of a clear summer afternoon.  What, then, of
 Pythagoras?
</p><p>
 It was during this walk that one of the strangest phenomena of sight which I
 have ever noticed appeared to me.  Every sunbeam was refracted into its
 primitive rays; wherever upon the landscape a pencil of light fell, between
 rocks or trees, it seemed a prismatic pathway between earth and heaven.  The
 atmosphere was one network of variegated solar threads, tremulous with
 radiance, and distilling rapture from its fibres into all my veins.
</p><p>
 It is singular in how many ways, during the hasheesh life, the harmony of
 creation was typified to me.  The harp of the universe, which I have already
 mentioned, was itself once repeated invision; other representations, on a
 scale perhaps even as grand, have left but a dim outline upon my memory; yet
 there is one which, though at least thrice repeated, lost no glory by growing
 familiar, but more and more deepened its first impress of awe and rapture.
 The first time that it occurred to me was when, at the close of my walk amid
 the majesty of apotheosis, I sat quietly at the window of my room looking out
 upon the sunset which bathed the gigantic landscape before me.  As yet the
 magnifying effect of the drug had not begun to decrease, and I gazed with
 fascinated eyes upon mountains which scaled heaven, and a river which was
 oceanic, in a breathless exultancy which vibrated on the diamond edge of pain.
</p><p>
 Suddenly the landscape floated out of sight, and in its place there sat on the
 trembling ether a tremendous ship, which within itself included every portion
 of created being.  Not a God-born essence, not a microscopic atom, but was
 builded up into some bulwark, beam, or spar of the colossal vessel.  Its
 marked outline was traced with the more glorious things of creation, the baser
 formed its inner and hidden parts.  Its sides, its stern, its bow were wrought
 of mighty stars whose rays interlaced; its masts were similar constellations,
 that at their heads, a million leagues above me, yet still distinctly radiant,
 bore systems of suns for lanterns.  Like lanterns flashed far off upon the
 prow, and dazzling clouds and nebulæ, filled out with the breath of an
 omnipotent will, strained the crystal yards upon which they hung.
</p><p>
 Now I was transferred to the deck of this infinite ship; her name was
 whispered in my ear, “The Ship of the Universe,” and the helm was put into my
 hand.  With unutterable symphonies we floated out upon the boundless space,
 and on the distant bows there broke in music the waves of resplendent ether.
 It was at this post of pilotage, steering out into the unknown void, that I
 felt human nature within me grow godlike to an insane excess.  The helmsman,
 the master of all being but the Divine, I burst into a chant of triumph, which
 shook the starry lights above me till their clusters rained glory like wine.
</p><p>
 I bethought me, forgetful of the infinity of the ocean we were traveling, that
 I might mark the rate of our progress, and so drew out my watch.  Its
 second-hand had stopped.  I held it to my ear and heard it tick.  Again I
 looked at it; the hand was motionless.  Continuing my gaze, I saw it at length
 move slowly through one of the second-spaces, when it stopped once more.
 Still I looked, and at last became aware that, by the hasheesh expansion of
 time, I was enabled to realize as a quite prolonged and definite period — a
 period as great as in our ordinary state a whole minute, at least, would
 appear — that almost infinitesimal instant during which a second-hand
 actually is motionless at the end of its vibration between two consecutive
 ticks.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter XV.  “Then
<a href="Notes/n04773.html" target="bottom">Seeva</a>
opened on the Accursed One his Eye of Anger”</h2>
<p>
 In the agonies of hasheesh, which now became more and more frequent, a new
 element began to develop itself toward a terrible symmetry, which afterward
 made it effective for the direst spiritual evil.  This was the appearance of
 Deity upon the stage of my visionary life, now sublimely grand in very
 person, and now through the intermediation of some messenger or sign, yet
 always menacing, wrathful, or avenging, in whatever form or manner the
 visitation might be made.  The myriad voices which, earlier in my enchanted
 life, I had heard from Nature through all her mysterious passages of
 communication, now died down forever, or, rather, became absorbed into one
 colossal and central voice, which spoke with the force of a fiat, and
 silenced my own faint replies like the sentence of inevitable doom.
</p><p>
 At first I was calmly warned.  Repeatedly, as I sat in an elysium of rosy
 languor, banqueting upon all that could exalt the inner sense into the
 serenest ecstasy, the hand that wrote upon the wall has invaded the sanctity
 of my feast, and its dread tracery has made me suddenly afraid.  In
 characters of light I have seen it written, “Beware how thou triflest with a
 mysterious power of the Most High!” and an audible voice, whose divinity at
 the moment I no more doubted than my own humanity, has added its injunction,
 “Beware! beware!”  Anticipating nothing but an uninterrupted procession of
 sublime images and the choral music which had so often ravished me out of the
 walls of sense, I have in an instant shuddered with unutterable terror as I
 felt the unlooked-for finger of some awful presence marking out downward
 channels for my upwelling thought, and solemnly forcing its streams into them
 with a power which bore no doubtful tokens of irresistibleness, but commanded
 even my own assent to the impossibility of escape.
</p><p>
 At length the reasons of my punishment were shown me.  Here again, as audibly
 as man talks with man, I was told, “Thou hast lifted thyself above humanity
 to peer into the speechless secrets before thy time; and thou shalt be
 smitten — smitten — smitten.”  As the last echo of the sentence died away,
 it always began its execution in
 <a href="Notes/n56936.html" target="bottom">Promethean</a>
 pangs.  At last even the faintest suggestion of the presence of Deity
 possessed a power to work me ill which hardly the haunting of demons had been
 able to produce before.  At one time I well remember beholding a colossal
 veiled figure part the drapery of sombre clouds which hung over the horizon,
 and appear upon a platform which I supposed to be the stage of the universe.
 No sound, no radiance issued from behind the veil, yet when the mysterious
 figure lifted his hands, I cried, “It is the Day of Judgment, and my doom is
 being pronounced!”  Then I fled for my soul, and cowered in the darkest spot
 that I could find.
</p><p>
 One tremendous vision occurred to me during the progress of one of these
 peculiar states, which, while it filled me with the agony of despair for my
 own fate, still gave me an inconceivable pain for another being.  In the
 heavens I heard a voice of weeping; no plaintive wail like that of woman in
 affliction, no passionate cry like that of a strong man riven by distress,
 but some nameless agony, foreshadowed by a solemn voice of woe, which spoke
 of universal creation suffering fearfully at its centre, life drying up at
 its fountain-head of being.  “Who weeps?” I cried in terror.  And the answer
 was returned to me out of the viewless air, “The Mighty One, who was of old
 held supreme, hath discovered that his supremacy is void.  Fate, blind Fate,
 that hath no ear for thy yearnings, sits mover of the spring of all things,
 and He to whom thou prayest is a discrowned King.”  Ah! well might there be
 such weeping in the heavens!  After all, we had no Lord, no God but Destiny.
 And I saw dynasties rush down in aimless ruin; good and evil met in eternal
 shock; there should be no prevalence to Right; the souls of all humanity were
 but atoms hurled onward through an infinite, lawless Chaos.  In my own spirit
 there sounded an echo to the celestial groaning, and with tearless horror I
 went straying through the rayless abyss of accident, a tortured creature
 without a goal.  “My God,” I whispered, “annihilate me!”  Words of accursed
 folly!  God no longer lived.
</p><p>
 I threw myself upon the earth, and clutched its dead, ungoverned dust in my
 writhing fingers.  I called no longer upon God, and was dumb because Fate was
 deaf.  I cursed the day that I was born — meaningless, still meaningless,
 since there was no power who could authenticate the curse.  I lay balancing
 the chances of being blotted out.  Somewhere in the eternities a crash might
 end me.  Forever?  What if my disrupted being should float together in cycles
 measurelessly on?  Reunited, I should wander once more a godless wretch!
</p><p>
 From horizon to horizon there flashed a quick glory; heaven rang through all
 its dome with a multitude of tremendous bands, and a sound of chanting joined
 in the symphony.  “Ah! what is this?” I said, and started up.  “I hear a
 harmony, and Fate knows only discords.”  Again the aerial voice responded,
 but now in a triumphant song, “After all, there is a Supreme; he rules whose
 right it is; there is no destiny but God, and he is over all forever.”  I
 leaped into the air — I shouted for joy.  The hope of the ages was sure —
 there was a God!
</p><p>
 Yet few of my visions of the Divine, as bitterly I tested in many a trial of
 fire, were to have an issue so blessed as this.
</p><p>
 Through the watches of a long and lonely night I had been sitting, with no
 other companion than my crusted lamp, and the shapes of strange men and
 things passed by me ceaselessly in tides of pain and pleasure.  At length I
 found myself in the highest story of an unknown and desolate house,
 surrounded by blank walls, and lighted by a single narrow window.  “This
 room,” spoke the hasheesh voice, “is that which thou callest Time.  Outside
 the whirl the resistless, the unbounded winds of Eternity.”
</p><p>
 I went to the window, and, looking out, saw nothing; but the heavy roar of a
 storm-lashed atmosphere shook the panes.  A strange fascination tempted me to
 draw nearer to the tempest.  I threw up the sash; in one moment the wind of
 eternity came rushing in; the foundations of my building shook, and
 straightway, by those stormy wings, every atom of it was winnowed out of
 sight, and, houseless, I found myself alone among the infinitudes.  For a
 while I was blown hither and thither unconsciously.  Then, coming to myself,
 I found that I had been wafted to the door of a certain friend of mine, who
 doubtless would care for me in my bewilderment of suffering.
</p><p>
 It was now four o’clock of a midsummer morning, and the western hills, that I
 could see through a hall window, began to be impurpled by reflection from the
 opposite horizon of the dawn.  My friend was an early riser, and he would,
 perhaps, be willing to walk with me, for I could not endure to sit still for
 a moment.
 “<a href="Notes/n04152.html" target="bottom">Baldwin</a>!”
 I cried; “Baldwin, it is necessary that I should speak with you,” at the same
 time knocking stoutly until I aroused him from sleep.
</p><p>
 It was at first very difficult for me to persuade him how intensely I was
 suffering, for my habit of self-control subdued even my face.  At last we
 were in the open air, and I walked clinging to Baldwin’s arm.  I said little,
 for I had no power to speak above a whisper, and in disjointed sentences.
 Coming to the steps which led from my own entry, we sat down for a few
 moments’ rest.  All familiarity of appearance was utterly dissipated from the
 place, and the buildings in view had become to me the temples and pylons of
 disentombed
 <a href="Notes/n32582.html" target="bottom">Memphis</a>.
 Awful Egyptian gateways frowned down upon me with a wrathful meaning, which
 they had not lost in all their centuries of sepulchral dust since the
 Pharaohs, and the grisly stare of Sphinx and
 <a href="Notes/n83176.html" target="bottom">Caryatid</a>
 appalled me, on all sides shutting out relief through change of view.  But,
 worse horror yet, beneath pedestal and foundation, under the lowest stone of
 the deepest-based temple of all the adamantine group, supporting its weight,
 bursting with a torture in which it could not writhe, lay my own, my living
 heart, unreached and never to be reached by the instrument of the
 resurrectionist of ages!
</p><p>
 It was
 <a href="Notes/n71770.html" target="bottom">the wrath of God which had whelmed that city</a>;
 my heart, therefore, lay under that wrath.  Yet I would appeal submissively
 to the Supreme, that he might perchance have mercy on me.  I looked
 heavenward, but what a vision there unveiled itself!  In the most intimate
 recess of a
 <a href="Notes/n71991.html" target="bottom">sable</a>,
 cloudy cavern flamed vengefully two burning, soul-penetrating eyes.  Their
 gaze dissolved me, and, turning away, I hid my face in my friend’s lap.
</p><p>
 When he sought the cause of my pain, I could not tell him.  At that moment I
 would not have embodied in words the infinity of wrathful menace which I had
 seen on high for the endowment of coined words.
</p><p>
 When at length I dared to look out from my lurking-place, my sight chanced to
 fall upon the vapory banks which skirted the gleaming western horizon.  In
 mercy my vision was here changed to one of peace.  As if to heal the pangs of
 my spirit, I saw, flowing down to me through a rift in the clouds, a silvery
 river of unutterable balm.  Unknown trees drooped, prodigal of wondrous fruit
 and odors, over its enameled margin; and rare beings floated, with their
 beaming girdles streaming on the breeze, above the crystal waters, or stooped
 to drink of them along the edge; and the hasheesh voice whispered me, “The
 River of the Water of Life.”  If heaven be like that, the stake and the rack
 are worth while to bear on the way to it!
</p><p>
 Slowly the celestial aspect of the vision passed away.  The river still
 remained, but on its banks a great city lifted her walls, and I knew that
 <a href="Notes/n41133.html" target="bottom">the river was Simois, and the city Troy</a>.
 As yet the inner citadel rose fair and vase, and the broad gates stood firm.
</p><p>
 Upon the bank of the stream I saw a dead face turned up toward the morning
 sky.  The agony of the death-struggle had plowed no furrows upon brow or
 cheek, and a mysterious, matchless loveliness slept in the features chiseled
 without fault.  More than I had ever been with life I was ravished with death
 — nay, I had given my own life to print a kiss upon the serene lips of the
 sleeper, or to pluck a lock from the wavy wealth which flowed out of his
 helmet, whose clasps, now unbound, hung idly to the earth beside him.
</p><p>
 A warrior still living came into my view.  With shield thrown on the ground
 and spear trailing through his arm in all the negligence of grief, with bowed
 crest and hands intensely clasped, he stood silently gazing upon the dead,
 and his look was so instinct with a superhuman grief that I wept in sympathy
 with him.
</p><p>
 Again the hasheesh voice spoke to me, “This is
 <a href="Notes/n02270.html" target="bottom">Achilles standing over the slain Patroclus</a>,”
 and my grief was changed into a sublime awe of mystery as I beheld that some
 unknown power had borne me over the bridgeless abyss of three thousand years
 to sorrow in the sorrowing of one of the grandest children of the epic Past.
</p><p>
 I have sometimes lamented that in my hasheesh experience visions of ecstasy
 almost always followed those of pain, and, indeed, generally concluded the
 trance, whether I walked or slept.  With opium-eaters or drinkers of liquor
 the case is ordinarily different.  Their happiness comes first, and the
 depression that follows brings with it shame, repentance, and at least a
 feeble aim at some new life.  When they have become satiated with their
 pleasure, they have to pay for it, and of all things which it is odious to
 pay for, a luxury enjoyed in the past is the most so.  If, in my own
 experience, such a disgust and loathing, such reaction of body and spirit,
 had succeeded the hasheesh indulgence, I had possessed much stronger motives
 for renouncing it.  But with me ecstasy had always the last word, and, on
 returning to the natural state, I remembered great tortures to be sure, but
 only as the unnecessary adjuncts to a happiness which I fondly persuaded
 myself was the legitimate effect of the drug.  I said, I have suffered, but
 only because certain unfortunate circumstances came in to pervert my
 condition, and I will, in the future, avoid them.  In the instance just
 related this fact fully obtained.  For days afterward I never looked toward a
 certain quarter of the heavens without shuddering, as I remembered that it
 was there I met the gaze of the burning eyes, and my hand involuntarily went
 to my heart as I saw the site of the disentombed city, in imagination, once
 more occupied by its ponderous and cruel piles of granite.  But from such
 memories as these my mind glanced with an elasticity as yet undiminished by
 its many shocks to the healing waters of the celestial river, or the face of
 mortal loveliness which has never, even now, passed thoroughly from my
 dreams.
</p><p>
 After this, therefore, I took hasheesh many times; nay, more, life became
 with me one prolonged state of hasheesh exaltation — a very network,
 singularly varied, of golden and iron strands, and throughout this life I
 ever and anon bore hours of wretchedness from superhuman threatenings such as
 I would not, if I could, transcribe entire, unless called by most imperative
 duty to hand down a legacy of admonition to all who may seek by other than
 the appointed means to mount into a life above the utterly material.  I shall
 not, therefore, detail in their order of time all the visitations of horror
 which afflicted me, but will endeavor here and there to cull those which may
 most graphically foreshadow that
 <a href="Notes/n04518.html" target="bottom">“last state of a man which is worse than the first.”</a>
</p><p>
 Repeatedly, as I have said, was I menaced by voices.  Yet the threatening
 sometimes took other forms, and none of them were more terrific than the
 exhibition to me, as frequently occurred, of all nature abominating me,
 sometimes for the reason clearly set forth that I had tampered with a mystery
 which encroached on the prerogative of God, and sometimes for the sake of a
 nameless crime — nameless because too horrible to be named — whose nature
 or aggravation I did not know, but which lurked for me in some covert by the
 wayside, ready to spring upon me with the sword of
 <a href="Notes/n60620.html" target="bottom">Nemesis</a>
 as I came by.
</p><p>
 Through the whole of one breezy summer afternoon I had been wandering through
 the woods which I have so often mentioned, happy to delirious excess, and
 sustained by the arm and the conversation of a congenial friend, whom I now
 found it wisest to take with me as a precaution against wild vagaries,
 whenever I walked in the hasheesh state.  Our pathway led over a thick carpet
 of fallen pine leaves, and my delight was heightened by the aromatic odors
 which exhaled from them in the warm winds which fanned us as we went.  In
 this perfume was luxuriant suggestion of Indian spice-groves, and nothing
 more marked than such a mere suggestion does the hasheesh-eater need to build
 up for him the fabric of a most amazing and odorous dream.  Straightway a
 grand procession of Burmese priests wound down the slope of a distant hill;
 solemnly, yet joyously, they approached me with music, and the air was loaded
 with the breath of their swinging censers.  At a vast distance above me I
 could catch glimpses through the tree-tops of a radiant sapphire sky, and
 rose-tinged clouds floated dreamily therein, yet the incense vapors reached
 and blended with them even at that grand height.  I stopped the foremost of
 the sacerdotal train, and spoke with him in his own language.  He answered
 me, and we understood each other through a prolonged conversation, while my
 friend stood waiting by my side, in speechless marvel at an exhibition of my
 delirium for which he could not see even as much cause as usually explains
 conduct in the hasheesh state.
</p><p>
 Our conversation over, the procession passed on.  I now felt, as suddenly as
 if it had fallen upon me from heaven, and as assuredly as if Heaven had
 spoken it, that that priestly multitude were the last of human kind that
 should ever endure my presence.  My companion abhorred me, and nothing but
 his sense of duty forced him to accede to my request that he should lead me
 to my room.  On the way back we passed a radiant and balmy knoll, whereon,
 amid a tropical excess of flowers and foliage, a group of Burmese children
 were dancing to stringed instrument.
 They saw me, and instantly rushed out of sight in precipitate agony of
 loathing.
</p><p>
 Reaching home, I entered my room.  Wherever, upon tables or chairs, on the
 bed or on the floor, there was any possible space, stood a coffin, with lid
 let down, disclosing the face of some one among the well-remembered dead.
 Though I never feared death, I always knew well the feeling of
 <a href="Notes/n08546.html" target="bottom">our ancient sire, who prayed the
 sons of Heth, saying “Give me a burying-place with you, that I may bury the
 dead out of my sight.”</a>
 Yet at this moment I crouched between the coffins as in an asylum, a demon,
 indeed, in nature, yet exulting in the security of possessing a hiding-place
 among the ruins which had once held holy souls.  My God! could the dead still
 know me and my dreadful state?  Over every one of those cold faces passed a
 ripple of dire agony!  They feared me, after having been lifeless for many
 years!  Distinctly I saw them convulsed with a tremendous shudder.  One by
 one they turned upon their faces, and eagerly snatched with their hands
 behind them to close the lids which let in my accursed sight.
</p><p>
 And now the two most loving friends who remained to me alive came walking
 toward me with tears streaming from their eyes.  They had come on foot from a
 far city to fall upon their knees and beseech me, by all that I held sacred
 in the dearness of our relation, by the most precious future of my soul, to
 abandon hasheesh.  The moment that their faces met my own, with a piercing
 cry of pain
 <a href="Notes/n51213.html" target="bottom">they fled out of my sight</a>.
</p><p>
 I ran out of my room and came to the house of an old and intimate companion.
 In a work-shop which he had fitted up as the place for his recreation he was
 busily engaged, as I came in, upon some mechanical contrivance, commenced
 when I had last seen him.  His back was turned, and, to attract his
 attention, I called him by name, “Edward!”
</p><p>
 Suddenly he faced me, smiling to recognize my voice; but, as the change of
 horror came over his features, he flung the hammer which he held in his hand
 at my head.  It just missed its aim, and I saw that he had delivered the
 weapon, not in anger, but as the last boon he could give me to deprive me of
 my infernal life.  The next moment he leaped through the lofty window of the
 room, and fathoms below I heard him crushed upon the pavement.
</p><p>
 In a former agony I had suddenly obtained relief from the view of a certain
 name written in soft tints upon the sky.  It was the name of a beautiful,
 good, and beloved girl; and as I saw it, it represented to me such lovely
 qualities of innocence, that beneath it I took sweet refuge as under an
 ægis.  In an instant I grew calm, and the devil-voices that boomed
 after me died away.
</p><p>
 Remembering this, I now bethought me to image that protectress’ name in the
 same way as before, and therefrom promised myself speedy comfort.  I sought
 to picture it before me, a name as simple as it was beautiful both in itself
 and its associations.  It was
 <a href="Notes/n27438.html" target="bottom">“Mary,”</a>
 and I fled to it as never hunted murderer fled to grasp the skirts of Our
 Lady, the holy namesake of this most pure child.
</p><p>
 In the first place, I tried to set the whole word before my eyes.  This I
 found impossible.  Then my endeavor was, letter by letter, to behold it in
 succession.  I tried to get the first letter.  And now came the inexplicable
 affliction of a perfect capability to think of the one which I wanted without
 being able to represent its form even to my inner sight.  Backward and
 forward I boxed the whole alphabet.  With inconceivable rapidity, every
 character beginning with A flew past me, but when the flight came to L there
 was one inevitable void between it and N.  At Z I took the trail of the
 alphabetic whirl; in the same way, from N the letters leaped to L.  At
 length, after a countless multitude of trials, I madly dashed myself upon the
 ground before that rushing demon font of type, and cried to Heaven, “An M! an
 M! for the love of my soul, grant me an M!”
</p><p>
 My prayer was not heard, but without warning I was lifted from the earth, and
 on a burning wind wafted like a dry leaf into the sky.  Whither and wherefore
 I was going I knew not until a dreadful voice hissed close beside my ear, “On
 earth thou didst triumph in superhuman joys — now shalt thou ring their
 knell.  It is thine to toll the summons to the Judgment.”
</p><p>
 I looked, and lo! all the celestial hemisphere was one terrific brazen bell,
 which rocked upon some invisible adamantine pivot in the infinitudes above.
 When I came it was voiceless, but I soon knew how it was to sound.  My feet
 were quickly chained fast to the top of heaven, and, swinging with my head
 downward, I became its tongue.  Still more mightily swayed that frightful
 bell, and now, tremendously crashing, my head smote against its side.  It was
 not the pain of the blow, though that was inconceivable, but the colossal
 roar that filled the universe, and rent my brain also, which blotted out in
 one instant all sense, thought, and being.  In an instant I felt my life
 extinguished, but knew that it was by annihilation, not by death.
</p><p>
 When I awoke out of the hasheesh state I was as overwhelmed to find myself
 still in existence as a dead man of the last century could be were he now
 suddenly restored to earth.  For a while, even in perfect consciousness, I
 believed I was still dreaming, and to this day I have so little lost the
 memory of that one demoniac toll, that, while writing these lines, I have put
 my hand to my forehead, hearing and feeling something, through the mere
 imagination, which was an echo of the original pang.  It is this persistency
 of impressions which explains the fact of the hasheesh state, after a certain
 time, growing more and more every day a thing of agony.  It is not because
 the body becomes worn out by repeated nervous shocks; with some
 constitutions, indeed, this wearing may occur; it never did with me, as I
 have said, even to the extent of producing muscular weakness, yet the
 universal law of constantly accelerating diabolization of visions held good
 as much in my case as in any others.  But a thing of horror once experienced
 became a
 <a href="Notes/n40357.html" target="bottom">“κτήμα ἔς ἀεί,”</a>
 an inalienable dower of hell;
 it was certain to reproduce itself in some — to God be the thanks if not in
 all — future visions.  I had seen, for instance, in one of my states of
 ecstasy, a luminous spot on the firmament, a prismatic parhelion.  In the
 midst of my delight in gazing on it, it had transferred itself mysteriously
 to my own heart, and there became a circle of fire, which gradually ate its
 way until the whole writhing organ was in a torturous blaze.  That spot, seen
 again in an after vision, through the memory of its former pain instantly
 wrought out for me the same accursed result.  The number of such remembered
 fagots of fuel for dire suggestion of course increased proportionally to the
 prolonging of the hasheesh life, until at length there was hardly a visible
 or tangible object, hardly a phrase which could be spoken, that had not some
 such infernal potency as connected with an earlier effect of suffering.
</p><p>
 Slowly thus does midnight close over the hasheesh-eater’s heaven.  One by
 one, upon its pall thrice dyed in
 <a href="Notes/n89183.html" target="bottom">Acheron</a>,
 do the baleful lustres appear, until he walks under a hemisphere flaming with
 demon lamps, and upon a ground paved with tiles of hell.  Out of this awful
 domain there are but three ways.  Thank God that over its alluring gate way
 is not written,
</p><center><a href="Notes/n38514.html" target="bottom">
     “Lasciate ogni speranza voi ch’entrate!”
</a></center>
<p>
 The first of these exits is insanity, the second death, the third
 abandonment.  The first is doubtless oftenest trodden, yet it may be long ere
 it reaches the final escape in oblivion, and it is as frightful as the domain
 it leaves behind.  The second but rarely opens to the wretch unless he pries
 it open with his knife; ordinarily its hinges turn lingeringly.  Toward the
 last let him struggle, though a nightmare torpor petrify his limbs — though
 on either side of the road be a phalanx of monstrous
 <a href="Notes/n58817.html" target="bottom">Afreets</a>
 with drawn swords of flame — though demon cries peal before him, and
 unimaginable
 <a href="Notes/n31875.html" target="bottom">houris</a>
 beckon him back — over thorns, through furnaces, but into — Life!
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter XVI. An Oath in the Forum of Madness</h2>
<p>
 Having been threatened many times with an utter isolation from human kind, it
 now became my practice, the moment that I began to feel the hasheesh change
 come over me, to run for sympathy to some congenial friend, and thus assure
 myself that the sentence had not yet been carried out.  I entered his room.
 I told him of my state; and, before increasing delirium had any power to
 pervert my thoughts, pledged him to care for me, never to leave me, always to
 interest himself in my welfare to the end.  Frequently this step prevented any
 under-current of horror from breaking up through my delightful tides of
 vision.  Frequently, when I beheld the fearful
 <a href="Notes/n58817.html" target="bottom">Afreet</a>
 invade the sanctity of my rejoicing with drawn
 <a href="Notes/n98284.html" target="bottom">cimeter</a>,
 was that remembered pledge to me as the ring of
 <a href="Notes/n45817.html" target="bottom">Abdaldar</a>,
 and straightway
</p><blockquote>
		“There ceased his power; his lifted arm,<br />
		&nbsp;Suspended by the spell,<br />
		&nbsp;Hung impotent to strike.”
</blockquote><p>
 The penal renunciation of me by God and man was the grand prevailing shadow
 which now lowered about the horizon of my visions, and thrice happy was I
 when, in this way, I could keep it from blackening the whole sky.  I mean
 more by this word “blackening” than mere metaphor, for, fully awake and at
 unclouded noonday, I have seen both heavens and air grow
 <a href="Notes/n71991.html" target="bottom">sable</a>
 suddenly with a supernatural eclipse, and I walked by no beacon save that of
 fiery eyes which
 <a href="Notes/n15848.html" target="bottom">“glared upon me through the darkness.”</a>
</p><p>
 Yet the spell was not always powerful.  There occurred seasons when I was
 beyond the power of man, and, as I thought, also an outcast from man’s league
 with God.  Man could not, God would not, keep faith with me.
</p><p>
 In the ecstasy of a serene uplifting I came one afternoon to the room of an
 acquaintance who had often expressed a wish to witness the hasheesh state in
 some walk with me while I was under the influence of the drug.  By the pledge
 of sympathy I bound him, and felt assured — doubly assured; for, as he
 prepared to accompany me out, without premonition there flashed into my mind
 that grand line of
 <a href="Notes/n91166.html" target="bottom">Festus</a>,
</p><center>
		“’Tis not my will that evil be immortal.”
</center><p>
 Not only did this line suggest to me a great future of good and happiness
 throughout my hasheesh eternity, but I saw the triumphant reign of right
 established forever among men.  A sublime emancipation from the thraldom of
 the ages had been declared to earth, and in visible and audible joy Creation
 leaped and sang.  Should I not, then, be happy, since God had pronounced it?
 I had no fears.  Taking the arm of my friend, I passed into the open air.
</p><p>
 We had hardly gone
 <a href="Notes/n57988.html" target="bottom">fifty feet</a>
 when I heard the dreadful voice distinctly
 speak to me:  “This is an imaginative man; if you are happy, he will
 powerfully sympathize with you; he will be fascinated, he will become like
 yourself a hasheesh-eater.  To save him from this, it is necessary that you
 should become an exemplar of agony.  Are you content?”  Knowing well what
 should ensue, aware of the tortures that lay prepared in the intimate abyss of
 the hasheesh hell, could I, as aught less than a God, say “Yes?”  Unable to
 bring myself to this height of superhuman heroism, I only forced my lips to
 murmur,
 <a href="Notes/n46867.html" target="bottom">“The will of God be done.”</a>
</p><p>
 Then the voice answered, “Horribly shalt thou suffer, suffer, suffer, more
 than tongue can tell, more than thou hast dreamed.”
</p><p>
 I clenched my fists, I shut my teeth, I nerved my whole being for the flood
 of agony which was about to pour upward on me from the depths.  I felt within
 me the prophecy of such pangs as would bring me to the very portals of
 nothingness.
</p><p>
 The sentence began to be fulfilled.  From the fence beside which we walked
 came hot blasts, as from a furnace, and, looking at its base, I saw fiery
 rifts in the ground whence the tornado issued.  I withered to a parchment
 sack, which bound in my heart as the sensitive fuel for more torments.
</p><p>
 And now through that heart glided a delicate saw, of innumerable blades, each
 sharpened to the ultimate thinness of steel, and each glowing with a red
 heat.  Slowly as a marble-saw the dreadful engine passed back and forth,
 hissing through the writhing muscle, and, as I pressed my hand upon my breast,
 it was scorched by the intense heat of the
 <a href="Notes/n17052.html" target="bottom">laminæ</a>.
 From the walls of houses, black talons darted forth to clutch my skirts; they
 left a scar like
 <a href="Notes/n62528.html" target="bottom">the touch of moxa</a>.
 And still I burned unquenchably.
</p><p>
 For a while I kept silence, shutting my mouth with
 <a href="Notes/n56936.html" target="bottom">Promethean</a>
 self-control.  Not only did my acquired habit of suffering speechlessly
 restrain me, but my pride could not endure the thought of acknowledging to
 him who walked by my side the vengeful infliction which had fallen upon me,
 in place of the mantle of rapture which my promise had prepared him to see.
</p><p>
 The voice then said, “Confess! confess!”  In desperation, I set my lips like
 a vice, and in my soul replied, “No! I will not!”
</p><p>
 “Wilt thou not confess?” wrathfully the voice returned.
</p><p>
 “Thou shalt then know bitterer agonies.”
</p><p>
 Now in my brain, moved by the same hellish machinery which was driving the
 saws through my heart, a murderous red-hot auger began turning round.  Its
 speed increased, and with it a tremendous roar that shook my being.  In every
 nerve I was agonized with an agony such as no martyr can ever have known.
 Head and heart both flaming, both riven by steel, the heavens looking
 wrathfully down, the earth opening up dreadful views of her demon-peopled
 deeps.  Oh, here was a hell in which how could I live!
</p><p>
 To the man at my side I whispered my confession.  I told him all.  I revealed
 to him the reasons of my punishment.  I adjured him by all my own immortal
 tortures never to tamper with the insane spell.
</p><p>
 And then, in piteous accents, I besought him to put out my fire.
</p><p>
 To the first restaurant at hand we hastened.  Passing in, I called for that
 only material relief which I have ever found for these spiritual sufferings —
 something strongly acid.  In the East the form in use is sherbet; mine was
 very sour lemonade.  A glass of it was made ready, and with a small glass
 tube I drew it up, not being able to bear the shock of a large swallow.
 Relief came but very slightly — very slowly.  Before the first glass was
 exhausted I called most imperatively for another one to be prepared as quickly
 as possible, lest the flames should spread by waiting.  In this way I kept a
 man busy with the composition of lemonade after lemonade, plunging my tube
 over the edge of the drained tumbler into the full one with a precipitate
 haste for which there were mortal reasons, until six had been consumed.
</p><p>
 And now, almost entirely restored, I assured myself that I had expiated my
 full penal term, and passed out rejoicing.  Baseless hope!  In a moment my
 heart caught fire again, and now it was a huge cathedral organ wrapped in a
 garment of flame, and played upon mysteriously by the fingers of the element
 which was burning it up.  Every stop that could sound like the despairing
 shrieks and groans of a human soul was open; nay, it was human; it lived in
 this slow and cruel death, and I felt its torture.  A devil-choir sang anthems
 of mockery to its accompaniment, and I grew phrensied as I recognized the
 voices which ages back in the measureless past had blasphemed over my
 white-hot cradle and rocked me with the lullaby of hell.  As we came along
 the broad terrace which extends before the colleges, I looked into heaven,
 and lo! upon rosy coursers serene angels were riding like an army, with
 incredible swiftness, upon some expedition of succor.  Behind them trailed on
 winds that blew from the gates of Paradise resplendent garments of cloud
 ermine dotted with stars.  In an ecstasy which upbore me above my demoniac
 pangs, I clasped my hands and shouted, “It is I whom they are coming to save!”
</p><p>
 Just then a black hand parted the top of heaven and shook at me menacingly.
 Talk not to me of faces instinct with spiritual expression; that hand, slowly
 brandished and then withdrawn, held more expression than the most facile
 face.  It told me all things of terror and of doom.
</p><p>
 Until we arrived at the door of my entry I was speechless.  Here my companion
 left me, and once more I gathered strength to burst into a bitter cry,
 <a href="Notes/n85696.html" target="bottom">“O God, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.”</a>
 I used the prayer of the Divine One with a most reverent soul, and hoping
 that the remembered words of his Son might move the heart of the Father.
</p><p>
 I added also a promise, “Save me, and I will never take hasheesh again.”
 Once more the voice spoke and answered me, “Many a time hast thou promised
 this before.  Speak! how hast thou kept thy vow?”
</p><p>
 This was true.  Repeatedly during the seasons of my suffering I had resolved,
 yes, sworn, that if I ever escaped with life and reason from the then present
 delirium, I would abjure the weed of madness forever.  On returning to the
 natural state I always recollected having made a promise, but regarded it as
 the act of an unphilosophic fear in irresponsible circumstances, and moved by
 a suffering which it was perfectly possible to prevent by sufficient
 attention to general health and spirits as elements materially modifying the
 effect of the drug.  Holding it, therefore, not at all binding, I had broken it
 as I would if it had been made in some terrific dream.  Yet always when the
 hasheesh suffering brought me into the same court before whose awful bar I had
 bound myself at my last similar trial, I was charged by the prosecuting voice
 with my breach of faith, convicted, sentenced by my own soul, and after that
 the pangs were sharp with the blade of
 <a href="Notes/n60620.html" target="bottom">Nemesis</a>.
 I writhed not under affliction, but under penalty.
</p><p>
 At this moment I answered the voice, “I have not kept my vow, but for this
 once be merciful, and I will sin no more.”
</p><p>
 Again my accuser spoke:  “Once more shalt thou go free — remember —
 <em>once!</em>”
</p><p>
 I accepted this promise as the safe-conduct of Deity; my pain ceased, and I
 walked fearlessly.
</p><p>
 But, oh unbearable!  In an instant it seized me again, and I groaned out,
 “Hath even faith perished in the Divine?  O God, hast <em>thou</em> broken
 faith with me?”  I received no reply.  For a few moments I paced up and down
 an empty room into which I had entered, with my hand upon my struggling
 heart, and feeling its mighty beats blend with the throbs of the devilish
 enginery.
</p><p>
 Then I came out into the entry.  From the opposite door a man was approaching
 me.  I stood still, and he also stopped.  I walked forward, and he came to
 meet me.  I turned away, and he followed behind me.  I faced him — we were
 foot to foot — it was myself!  Yes, there stood my double, resembling me as
 face answereth to face in water.  Another being for whose crimes I had to
 answer, whose wrathful portion I should suffer!  It was too much to endure.  I
 fell upon my knees, and called out to Heaven, “Oh! do I not dream?  Tell me,
 tell me, am I indeed more than one?”  I was answered, “Thou are Legion!”  I
 looked away toward the stairs.  Crouching upon a step, glaring upon me between
 the posts of the balustrade, clutching at me like a tiger-cat, sat — myself
 again!  I rushed toward the door of another room; I would lock myself in from
 my multitude of being.  At that door, tearing his hair, gnashing his teeth,
 smiling with a maniac smile of pain, stood once more myself!
</p><p>
 The remainder of my personalities I was spared from seeing.  One more would
 have driven me forever mad.
</p><p>
 For the last time I cried to Heaven, “How shall I be saved?”  I was now
 finally answered, “Thy goodness extendeth not to God.  To man must thou repay
 thy fault in that thou hast sought to lift thyself above humanity.  Go find a
 man who will believe thy promise and thou shalt be saved.”
</p><p>
 Hard condition.  So many of my friends had known the former vows, and seen
 how I had kept them, that I bitterly feared I should never be able to fulfill
 it.
</p><p>
 But as in this lay my last hope, I rushed up the staircase to find the man
 who would accept my security.  The first I met was at the top of the farthest
 stairs.  There he was sitting, as if in anticipation that I should come, on
 the throne of a solemn tribunal.
</p><p>
 Yet not a tribunal of severe and unrelenting justice.  The courtly
 <a href="Notes/n50587.html" target="bottom">appanage</a>
 of the scene which surrounded him was necessary for my very sense of
 security, since, in bringing my case to any other than the most august
 judication, I should have felt that I was trifling with immeasurable destiny.
</p><p>
 Moreover, the man was my bosom friend.  In his truthful and serene eyes
 nothing but love for me had ever sat, nothing but most brother pity was in
 them now.  I loved him for himself — I reverenced him for what he was, the
 calm, the thoughtful, the wise, the sincere.  Heaven had sent him now to hear
 me, and both in his affection and his character I put my trust.
</p><p>
 “Robb, my dear, my priceless friend, have pity on me.  Accept my pledge.  I
 will take hasheesh no more.”
</p><p>
 I spoke to him as if he knew what he did not know, my previous suffering.  So
 he replied sadly, “Ah! you have said that many times before.”  I began to
 fear he might refuse me.  I looked around, and standing not three paces off
 stood a cold shadow, and with its lip and finger it mocked me, saying plainly
 without words, “You are mine; he will not believe you.”  It was Insanity.
</p><p>
 Once more I turned, and looking at him as such a sight along could make one
 look, I simply said, “<em>Believe me!</em>”  This was all, but the intensity
 of that one expression contained in it enough meaning to show what a dire
 spiritual necessity there was that he should grant my request.  With emphasis
 he answered, “I <em>do</em> believe you.”  With a look of baffled hellish
 malice the shadow fled away.
</p><p>
 After this I was but once more in pain.  As a great chimney, I had grown
 <a href="Notes/n71834.html" target="bottom">hundreds of feet</a>
 into the air; with pitch and fagots of wood, with all things
 inflammable, I was completely filled.  Suddenly some one approached and held
 a lighted torch to the draught below.  In an instant, from basement to spiral
 jets, my head was crowned with flame and plumed with smoke, and far down in
 the middle of the blazing mass my heart lay cracking and singing in agony.
</p><p>
 “Water!” I shouted; “I am on fire!  Help, for the love of heaven!” They tore
 my clothes from me in the most precipitous haste.  From head to foot they
 deluged me with water.  I heard within me the coals hiss and the cinders fall
 down dead into the grate below, as in an extinguished furnace.
</p><p>
 And then I grew calm.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter XVII.  Down with the Tide.</h2>
<center><table width="80%" border="1"><tr><td>
 <font color="#ff0000">NOTE: You can see where Ludlow reworked a portion of
 his earlier article
 <a href="../TheApocalypseOfHasheesh/index.html#chapter17">“The Apocalypse of
 Hasheesh”</a> to write this chapter.
</td></tr></table></center>
<p>
 For days after the last-mentioned suffering I adhered sacredly to my vow.
 Fortified by the sympathy of my friends, nerved by the images of a fearful
 memory, staying myself on the Divine, I battled against the fascinations of
 the drug successfully.  At last there came a time when nothing but superhuman
 endurance could withstand and conquer.
</p><p>
 As I have frequently said, I felt no depression of body.  The flames of my
 vision had not withered a single corporeal tissue nor snapped a single
 corporeal cord.  All the pains induced by the total abandonment of hasheesh
 were spiritual.  From the ethereal heights of Olympus I had been dropped into
 the midst of an
 <a href="Notes/n89183.html" target="bottom">Acherontian</a>
 fog.  My soul breathed laboriously, and grew torpid with every hour.  I
 dreaded an advancing night of oblivion.  I sat awaiting extinction.  The
 shapes which moved about me in the outer world seemed like galvanized
 corpses; the living soul of Nature, with which I had so long communed, had
 gone out like the flame of a candle, and her remaining exterior was as poor
 and meaningless as those wooden trees with which children play, and the
 cliffs and chalets carved out of box-wood by some Swiss in his winter
 leisure.
</p><p>
 Moreover, actual pain had not ceased with abandonment of the indulgence.  In
 some fiery dream of night, or some sudden thrill of daylight, the old pangs
 were reproduced with a vividness only less than amounting to hallucination.
 I opened my eyes, I rubbed my forehead, I arose and walked: they were then
 perceived to be merely ideal; but the very necessity of this effort to arouse
 myself, a necessity which might occur at any time and in any place, became
 gradually a grievous thraldom.
</p><p>
 But harder to endure than all these was a sudden flash of that supernatural
 beauty which had so often tinged my past experience — a quick disclosure of
 the rosy hasheesh sky let in upon me by some passing wind which fanned aside
 the dense vapors of my present life — a peal of the remembered mighty music
 pouring through
 <a href="Notes/n22990.html" target="bottom">the gratings of my voiceless prison</a>,
 and dying sadly away against its granite walls. Ah! well may the most rigid
 moral critic forgive me, if, looking upward to my former peak of vision, I
 spoke to my past self as if it were still sitting there.
</p><blockquote><a href="Notes/n09553.html" target="bottom">
      “So mayst thou watch me where I weep,<br />
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As unto vaster motions bound,<br />
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The circuits of thine orbit round<br />
      &nbsp;A higher height, a deeper deep.”
</a></blockquote><p>
 Like
 <a href="Notes/n55983.html" target="bottom">Eblis</a>,
 I refused to worship earth when I had seen heaven, and once more dared to
 assume his pride even with his pangs.
</p><p>
 I returned to hasheesh, but only when I had become hopeless of carrying out
 my first intention — its utter and immediate abandonment.  I now resolved to
 abandon it gradually — to retreat slowly from my enemy, until I had passed
 the borders of his enchanted ground, whereon he warred with me at vantage.
 Once over the boundaries, and the nightmare spell unloosed, I might run for
 my life, and hope to distance him in my own recovered territory.
</p><p>
 This end I sought to accomplish by diminishing the doses of the drug. The
 highest I had ever reached was
 <a href="Notes/n14929.html" target="bottom">a drachm</a>,
 and this was seldom necessary except in the most unimpressible states of the
 brain, since, according to the law of the hasheesh operation which I have
 stated to hold good in my experience, a much less bolus was ordinarily
 sufficient to produce full effect at this time than when I commenced the
 indulgence.  I now reduced my daily ration to
 <a href="Notes/n83351.html" target="bottom">ten</a>
 or
 <a href="Notes/n71863.html" target="bottom">fifteen grains</a>.
</p><p>
 The immediate result of even this modified resumption of the habit was a
 reinstatement into the glories of the former life.  I came out of my clouds;
 the outer world was reinvested with some claim to interest, and the lethal
 torpor of my mind was replaced by an airy activity.  I flattered myself that
 there was now some hope of escape by grades of renunciation, and felt
 assured, moreover, that since I now seldom experienced any thing approaching
 hallucination, I might pass through this gradual course without suffering on
 the way.
</p><p>
 I did not reveal to my friends the fact of my once more eating hasheesh.  To
 no one who had not participated in my sufferings could I have shown adequate
 reasons for doing so.  I should have pleaded an excuse which none but myself
 could feel; I should have been answered by the earnest entreaty to cleave to
 my first purpose — perhaps by the expressed or tacit distrust of my intention
 to abjure the indulgence at all.  But I felt no danger of betraying myself,
 since from the meditations and the ecstasies in which I now sat I could
 arouse myself at need, talk and act naturally, or perform any of the duties
 to which I might be called.  I do not think there was a person beside myself
 who once suspected, at this time, my return to the indulgence.  I was not
 even questioned upon the subject.
</p><p>
 Once, and once only, was I in peril of making known my secret.  With two or
 three of my friends I had made an agreement that on a certain afternoon, as
 was our wont, we should speak in turn, and subject to each other’s criticism,
 for the sake of improvement in oratory.  When the time arrived, I found
 myself not only adequate to any amount of speech-making, but liable to adorn
 my sentences with an Oriental luxuriance of imagery which would infallibly
 disclose the fact of my having taken hasheesh two hours before, for the dose,
 although not extending in size beyond the boundary I had set myself, had
 still operated with an unusual power.
</p><p>
 When my friends called for me I knew not what to do.  There was no sickness
 to plead — the animation with which every word was uttered would have belied
 that; other engagement I had not, for the appointment had been made
 unconditionally and some time before.  If I went with them, it amounted
 almost to a physical certainty that I would break forth into some rapture
 which would let me out.  Yet there was no time to be lost.  I resolved to go,
 and giving into the hand of Will the curb of Passion, started with them down
 the street.
</p><p>
 The struggle which I made to keep silent, or, at furthest, to talk in a
 practical way, was among the hardest of my lifetime.  There is a game of
 forfeits, to most of my readers no doubt well enough known, which consists in
 walking three times diagonally across a room, bearing a lighted candle, and
 repeating the most absurd formula to a person who meets you similarly
 furnished, without moving a muscle of the face.  There is also a legend,
 woven into the
 <a href="Notes/n28864.html" target="bottom">Arabian Nights</a>,
 of a young man who, in fulfillment of some enterprise, descended through a
 demon-haunted cavern where, though assailed on every side by sights of
 astoundment most provocative of speech, he was compelled to seal his lips
 under pain of a terrible retribution.
</p><p>
 The nature only, and not the degree of self-control demanded by my
 circumstances, is foreshadowed by these illustrations.  I was assailed with
 every possible temptation to laughter and to open amazement.  At the very
 commencement of my walk, for the first time in several months I was in China.
 All the roofs turned up at the corners, and amorphous dragons flaunted in
 red, green, and gold from their peaks.  The air smelt of orange-blossoms, and
 boys hawked fruit about the streets in the dialect of
 <a href="Notes/n25398.html" target="bottom">Whampoa</a>.
</p><p>
 But the Chinese hallucination did not long continue.  I presently remembered
 the old familiar town in which I was walking, yet what a singular change in
 manners had passed over it!  Every house had been to dancing-school, and
 returned educated into the most excruciating politeness.  They were all
 paying me their salutations as I passed with a knowledge of good-breeding
 absolutely overwhelming.
</p><p>
 A spruce brick tenement, evidently a new-comer, and, on account of the
 insecurity of his social position, particularly anxious to ingratiate himself
 with the habitués, made me a profound bow, even unto his doorstep.
</p><p>
 A respectable old house, that had been there since the last war, looked
 stiffly over the walls which flanked his chimneys, and slightly inclined
 himself with a rigid courtliness — a very
 <a href="Notes/n24318.html" target="bottom">Roger de Coverley</a>
 in stone and mortar.
</p><p>
 A fast-looking house of a particularly vivid color, conscious of containing
 all the modern improvements, and profusely ornamented in gingerbread-carved
 workmanship, took upon himself to be easy in his address as a
 <a href="Notes/n11549.html" target="bottom">soi-disant</a>
 fashionable, and nodded to me familiarly, at the same time saying at his
 front door, “How are you, old fellow?” “Curse his impudence!” said I to
 myself, and walked on.
</p><p>
 The next was a maidenly little cottage, who modestly dropped her second-story
 window-sashes, and blushed up to her eaves-trough as we came by, at the same
 time courtesying clear into her back yard.
</p><p>
 A church smiled condescendingly on me from its belfry, bowed forward, and
 immediately took it back by making another bow backward, with a look which
 said, “I hope you take care of yourself, young man.”
</p><p>
 A shop bowed blandly and inquiringly, with a what-d’ye-buy air, and even a
 poor lawyer’s office abased its cornice cautiously, as if it feared to commit
 itself.  In all these salutations there was something which gave me a
 half-consciousness that after all it was only an emblematical show, yet it
 required all my self-constraint to refrain from returning the compliment in a
 succession of bows.  I mentally represented to myself my circumstances as
 nearly as I could make them natural.  I painted the necessity of keeping
 still with all the picturesqueness of which I was capable, and so succeeded
 in controlling all outbreaks of my feeling.
</p><p>
 At length we arrived at the place of our appointment (a church to which we
 had the key), and one after another my friends spoke, and I listened quietly
 until my own turn came.  With a terrible effort I held myself in, and walked
 to the platform still guiltless of my own betrayal.  If I could resist a few
 moments more, I was safe.
</p><p>
 Hardly had I uttered my first sentence before I awakened to the consciousness
 that I was
 <a href="Notes/n60525.html" target="bottom">Rienzi</a>
 proclaiming freedom to enthralled Rome.  I portrayed the abased glories of
 the older time; I raised
 <a href="Notes/n25386.html" target="bottom">both the Catos</a>
 from their graves to groan over the present slavery; I hurled fiery invective
 against
 <a href="Notes/n65868.html" target="bottom">the usurpations of Colonna</a>,
 and pointed the way through tyrant blood up to an immortal future.  The broad
 space below the tribune grew populous with a multitude of intense faces, and
 within myself there was a sense of towering into sublimity, as I knew that it
 was my eloquence which swayed that great host with a storm of indignation,
 like the sirocco passing over reeds.
</p><p>
 Strange to say, I did not even here reveal my state.  That vigilant portion
 of my duality which had controlled me hitherto, guarded me from any
 unwarrantable excess even in the impassioned character of Rienzi.
</p><p>
 For a number of weeks I continued this moderate employment of hasheesh,
 sometimes diminishing the doses, then returning to the boundary, but never
 beyond it.  As the diminutions went on by a tolerably regular but slow ratio,
 I flattered myself that I was advancing toward a final and perfect
 emancipation.  But the progress was not that painless one with which I had
 flattered myself.  There was much less to endure than in the worst part of
 the former period of indulgence, yet it could have been many times diminished
 in intensity without descending to the plane of ordinary physical or
 spiritual suffering.
</p><p>
 One of the most bitter experiences of hasheesh occurred to me about this
 time, and since it is the only one which in my memory stands in peculiar
 distinctness of outline from the vague background of alternating lights and
 shadows, I give it as powerful and recompensing contrast to the
 formerly-detailed vision in which I triumphed as the millennial king.
</p><p>
 It was now with Christ the crucified that I identified myself.  In dim horror
 I perceived the nails piercing my hands and my feet, but it was not this
 which seemed the burden of my suffering.  Upon my head, in a tremendous and
 ever-thickening cloud, came slowly down the guilt of all the ages past and
 all the world to come.  By a dreadful quickening, I beheld every atrocity and
 nameless crime coming up from all time on lines that centred in myself.  The
 thorns clung to my brow, and bloody drops stood like dew upon my hair, yet
 these were not the instruments of my agony.  I was withered like a leaf in
 the breath of a righteous vengeance.  The curtain of a lurid blackness hung
 between me and heaven; mercy was dumb, and I bore the anger of Omnipotence
 alone.  Out of a fiery distance demon chants of triumphant blasphemy came
 surging on my ear, and whispers of ferocious wickedness ruffled the leaden
 air about my cross.  How long I bore this vicarious agony I have never known;
 from the peculiarity of the time in such states, it would be impossible to
 know.
</p><p>
 But, in general, while feeling the full effect of the dose, I sat in
 solitude, with closed eyes, enjoying the tranquil procession of images,
 especially those of scenery, which I could dispel at will, since they did not
 reach the reality of hallucination.  Or, if my quiet was broken by the
 entrance of others, by an effort conversation was possible with them, so long
 as care was taken to prevent the introduction of any powerfully-agitating
 subject.  This care I found to be extremely necessary, as the peculiar
 sensitiveness to impression which is induced by hasheesh made sympathy so
 deep as to be painful. In one instance this fact discovered itself with
 sufficient clearness to warn me ever afterward.  To comply with the request
 of a friend, I read him some verses upon doubts of human immortality.  Upon
 arriving at a passage where one of our primeval fathers is introduced as
 speaking in agony of his dread of advancing death, I felt that agony
 becoming, by sympathy, so strongly my own emotion, that, lest I should
 completely identify myself with the sufferer, I was forced to lay down the
 manuscript, and plead some excuse for not continuing the reading.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Chapter XVIII.  My Stony Guardian</h2>
<p>
 It was during this period that I spent a short time at Niagara.  In the hurry
 of setting out upon my journey thither, I left behind that traveling
 companion, which was more indispensable than any article or all possible
 articles of luggage, my box of boluses.  Too late to repair the error, too
 late for my own serenity, I found out that my staff of life was out of reach
 at a place on Lake Ontario where
 <a href="Notes/n32562.html" target="bottom">the most concentrated cannabine
 preparation is the jib-stay</a> of a fore-and-after.
</p><p>
 At the Falls, however, and once grown enthusiastic, I fared much better than
 I had expected.  The only trace of suffering at first perceptible was left in
 the shape of a somewhat nervously-written name on the entry-book of the hotel.
 The excitement of a sublimity which, to say the least, is extra-natural, for a
 while sustained me above pain for the loss of the super-natural.
</p><p>
 Moreover, a material support came in to augment the spiritual.  As lemon-juice
 had been sometimes an effectual cure for the sufferings of excess, I now
 discovered that a use of tobacco, to an extent which at other times would
 be immoderate, was a precentive of the horrors of abandonment.  Making use of
 this knowledge, I smoked incessantly when out of the immediate presence of
 the waters — never could I bring myself, however needy, to puff in the face
 of Niagara — a blasphemy of deed only second to one of word which came to my
 notice during this visit.
</p><p>
 For an hour of one glorious morning I had been looking down from the balcony
 of the Goat Island tower upon the emerald crown in all the luxury of solitude.
 A heavy footstep from within sounded upon the staircase, breaking up my
 dream, and the next moment flashed upon the platform a man who had come to
 “do” the falls, with the odors of metropolis still cleaving to his garments,
 and rotund in all the plenitude of corporeal well-being — an
 <a href="Notes/n17544.html" target="bottom">Omphalopsychite</a>
 by necessity, since he found it impossible to look down at all without
 resting his eyes upon that portion of his individuality tangent to the lower
 border of the waistcoat.  The utmost that I could ask from this adipose
 formation was to keep silence: he did not even do that.  Turning his face
 toward the wind to get its full tonic effect, for a while he drank it in
 copious draughts, and then enthusiastically broke forth to me, “What a
 splendid thing to give a man appetite for his dinner!”  Sensitive as my state
 made me at that moment, I so far controlled myself as to answer nothing.  It
 was well that I had not been hasheesh-glorified when he made his assault, or,
 notwithstanding he no way lacked in the bodily, he might not have been heard
 of again till he was fished out of Ontario.
</p><p>
 It has always been surprising to me that the Falls are so much the theme of
 lovers of the sublime to the almost entire exclusion of the Rapids.  The
 Rapids have a majesty of their own, which, to my mind, has never yielded at
 all to the very different one of the Falls.  Trying to resolve this difference
 by analysis, it seems to be this: in the precipitous brink over which takes
 place the final leap of the waters, we find a reason for the grand power of
 the descent.  Higher up the river the slope of the flood is comparatively
 imperceptible; the headlong crash of the waves becomes to us a result of some
 inner will rather than of soulless gravity; and by the putting forth of power
 from this mysterious will we are overwhelmed, seeming to find our cause in
 spirit and not in matter.  Quite as holy a place does the upper point of the
 Island appear to me, looking forth, as it does, upon the oceanic wrath of
 that resistless billowy soul, from the silent eddy where it cleaves itself for
 the last maddening throes, far up to the line of its trembling in the first
 consciousness of ingathered strength against the farther sky, quite as holy
 as any station beside the shifting pavement of flecked and molten porphyry
 below the Fall, where the spray is forever floating back upon the headlong
 wall like marble-dust wind-driven from the floor of the Great Sculptor.
</p><p>
 There is still another element in the sublimity of the place too little
 noticed, or noticed only as a curiosity.  This is the Profile Rock, in the
 edge of the American Fall nearest to Goat Island.  So little is it known, that
 many persons go there unaware of its existence, and come away without having
 had it pointed out to them.  Indeed, by a mere superficial looker at, and not
 a student of Niagara, it would be, in all probability, passed over.  Were I
 not near-sighted, I should be ashamed to confess that I did not see it myself
 until my eyes were called to it by a most sincere and ardent lover of all that
 is noble in nature, a very near and dear friend, whom I was so fortunate as to
 have beside me in most of my walks.
</p><p>
 Sustaining the weight of those vast waters upon his half-bowed head, the stony
 figure stands, visible under the veil, or visible at least above the waist,
 yet no more is needed than the face, with its look of calm endurance, to
 suggest for him a whole history of Fate.  At that time of which I have been
 speaking, I myself felt enough need of fortitude to give me an intense
 yearning toward this emblem of heroic patience, and as I looked upon him I
 more and more felt myself loving him even humanly.  In many a vision afterward
 did he appear to me as a silent consoler, when Niagara itself had become an
 affliction to my memory; and as side by side we stood, he under his flood, I
 under mine, I gathered strength from his moveless eye to bear unto the end
 all which should finally be given to the triumph of resignation.
</p><p>
 Alone and unable to sleep, though the late night heard nothing to break its
 stillness but the ceaseless rush of the river, I felt myself thus “flowing in
 words” to that mute face of forbearance:
</p><blockquote>
	Niagara! I am not one who seeks<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;To lift his voice above thine awful hymn;<br />
	Mine be it to keep silence where God speaks,<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Nor with my praise to make his glory dim.<br />
<br />
	Yet unto thee, shape of the stony brow,<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Standing forever in thine unshared place,<br />
	The human soul within me yearneth now,<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;And I would lay my head beside thy face<br />
<br />
	King, from dim ages of God set apart<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;To bear the weight of a tremendous crown,<br />
	And feel the robes that wrap thy lonely heart<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Deaden its pulses as their folds flow down;<br />
<br />
	What sublime years are written on the scroll<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Of thine imperial, dread inheritance,<br />
	Man shall not read until its lines unroll<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;In the great hand that set thy stony trance.<br />
<br />
	Perchance thy moveless adamantine look<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;For its long watch o’er the abyss was bent<br />
	Ere the thick gates of primal darkness shook,<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;And light broke in upon thy battlement.<br />
<br />
	And when that sudden glory lit thy crown,<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;And God lent thee a rainbow from His throne,<br />
	E’en through thy stony breast flashed there not down<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Somewhat of His joy also made thine own?<br />
<br />
	Who knoweth but He gave thee to rejoice<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Till man’s hymn sounded through the time to be,<br />
	And when our choral coming hushed thy voice,<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Still left thee something of humanity?<br />
<br />
	Still seemest thou a priest — still the veil streams<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Before thy reverent eyes, and hides His light,<br />
	And thine is as the face of one who dreams<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Of a great glory now no more his right.<br />
<br />
	Soon shall I pass away; the mighty psalm<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Of thine o’ershadowing waters shall be heard<br />
	In memory only; but thy speechless calm<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Hath lessons for me more than many a word,<br />
<br />
	Teaching the glory of the soul that bears<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;Great floods, a veil between him and the sun,<br />
	And, standing in the might of Patience, dares<br />
	&nbsp;&nbsp;To bide His finishing who hath begun.
</blockquote><p>
 I have said that Niagara itself became an affliction to me.  More especially
 was this the case after my total abandonment of hasheesh; but I must not
 anticipate.  Every one of sensitive mind has noticed the permanency of
 impressions left by grand scenery, of none more so than Niagara.  Indeed, I
 have acquaintances who for months, in all their day-dreams as well as those
 of sleep, were haunted by the Falls in a manner almost like optical illusion.
 Their visions were always delightful.  Fancy now a mind naturally very
 impressible by scenery, rendered numberless times more sensitive by a process
 which left it a permanent photographic plate, and then exposed to such
 lights as those reflected from that supernatural river: you will then have the
 condition in which I left Niagara — a condition continuing for many a month
 afterward.  So slowly did the traces of that imagery fade on my mind, that I
 have never, even now, wholly lost them.  At times the terrors of the brink and
 the cataract still echo in dreams with a hasheesh mystery, and appall me as
 the presence of their real danger could hardly appall.
</p><p>
 Upon returning to a place where hasheesh was within reach, I fled to it for
 relief as into an ark.  By considerable self-government, I conquered the
 tendency to excess produced by long deprivation of the stimulus, and indulged
 in it within my stated boundaries only.
</p><p>
 I now began to find that gradual was almost as difficult as instant
 abandonment.  The utmost that could be done was to keep the bolus from
 exceeding
 <a href="Notes/n71863.html" target="bottom">fifteen grains</a>.
 From
 <a href="Notes/n83351.html" target="bottom">ten</a>
 and
 <a href="Notes/n89516.html" target="bottom">five</a>,
 which at times I tried, there was an insensible sliding back to the larger
 allowance, and even there my mind rebelled at the restriction.  While there
 was no suffering from absolute intellectual lassitude, there still, ever and
 anon, arose a longing more or less intense for the former music and ecstatic
 fantasia, which could not be satisfied by a mere panoramic display of
 internal images, however beautiful, dissolved in a moment by opening my eyes.
</p><p>
 Yet I struggled strenuously against the fascination to a more generious
 ration, and hoped against hope for some indefinite time at which the dangerous
 spell might be entirely unbound.
</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2>
  Chapter XIX.
  <a href="Notes/n43527.html" target="bottom">Resurgam</a>
  </h2>
  <p><a name="quote29440" />
   One morning, having taken my ordinary dose without yet feeling its effect,
   I strolled into a bookseller’s to get the latest number of Putnam’s.
   Turning over its leaves as it lay upon the counter, the first article which
   detained my eyes was headed
   <a href="Notes/n61038.html" target="bottom">“The Hasheesh Eater.”</a>
   None but a man in my circumstances can realize the intense interest which
   possessed me at the sight of these words.</p>
  <p>
   For a while I lingered upon them with an inexplicable dread of looking
   further into the paper.  I shut the book, and toyed with my curiosity by
   examining its cover, as one who receives a letter directed in some
   unfamiliar hand carefully scrutinizes the postmark and the envelope, and
   dallies with the seal before he finally breaks it open.  I had supposed
   myself the only hasheesh-eater upon this side of the ocean; this idea of
   utter isolation had been one element in many of my horrors.  That some one
   among my acquaintance had been detailing a fragment of my own experience,
   as viewed by him from without, was my first hypothesis.  Although, in
   itself considered, there was nothing very improbable in the acquirement of
   the habit by another person, the coincidence of my having fallen upon this
   article, with the hasheesh force still latent within me, seemed so
   remarkable that I could not believe it.  Then I said to myself, I will not
   read this paper now.  I will defer it to another time; for, if its recital
   be one of horrors, it may darken the complexion of my awaited vision.  In
   pursuance of this purpose, I passed out of the shop and went down the
   street.</p>
  <p>
   I was not satisfied.  Whichever way I turned I was followed by a shadow of
   fascination.  By an irresistible attraction I was drawn back to the
   counter.  If the worst were there, I must know it.  I returned, and there,
   as before, lay the unsealed mystery.  With a trembling hand I turned to the
   place; again I scrutinized the caption, to see if some unconscious illusion
   of a hasheesh state, which had ensued before I was aware, had not made
   objective the words which so many a day had stamped upon my brain.  No; 
   plainly as eyes could read them, they stood upon the page.  I would read
   the article from beginning to end.  This resolution, once formed, was
   shaken, but not broken, by an unavoidable glance ahead, which told me that
   the recital was one of agonies.</p>
  <p>
   It was only a moment before I found that I was not this hasheesh-eater.
   Yet as, with the devouring gaze of a miser, I read, dwelt upon, and re-read
   every line, I found such startling analogies to my own past experience that
   cold drops started upon my forehead, and I exclaimed, “This man has been in
   my own soul.”  We both had been abandoned of Heaven; had climbed up into
   the prerogatives of Deity, thence to be cast down; had drawn the accursed
   knife at the whispers of a frightful temptation; had been the disowned, the
   abominated, the execrated of men.  Should I carry the parallel further?
   <em>He had forever abandoned hasheesh.</em>  How terribly this question
   shook my soul!  In an instant, like some grand pageant, the glories of the
   enchantment streamed before my eyes.  Out of the past came Memory, swinging
   delicious censers; upon the fragrant vapor, as it floated upward, was
   traced a sublimer heaven, a more beauteous earth, from the days gone by,
   than ever Sorcery painted upon the Fate-compelling smoke for a rapt gazer
   into Futurity.  There the pangs of the old time had no place; all was
   serenity, ecstasy, revelation.  Should I forego all this forever?</p>
  <p>
   <em>So help me God, I would!</em></p>
  <p>
   The author of that article I did not know.  Of his name I had not even the
   faintest suspicion.  Yet for him I felt a sympathy; yes, though it be
   unworldly, an affection such as would move me to the highest office of
   gratitude.  Into my hitherto unbroken loneliness he had penetrated;
   unconscious of each other’s presence, we had walked the valley of awful
   shadows side by side.  As no other man upon the earth could feel for me, he
   could feel.  As none other could counsel me, he might counsel.  For the
   first time in all the tremendous stretch of my spell-bound eternity heard I
   the voice of sympathy or saw I an exemplar of escape.  Though I might never
   look upon his face on earth, disenthralled from the bodily I should know 
   him immediately, for I was bound to him by ties spun from the distaff of a
   supernatural hand.</p>
  <p>
   I returned homeward, bearing in my mind almost the exact words of that
   vivid and most truthful recital.  So powerfully did its emotion possess me
   as to supplant entirely that of the drug, which did not once render itself
   perceptible.</p>
  <p>
   There is a rich lesson of deep springs of human action taught by the old
   history, wherein
   <a href="Notes/n82800.html" target="bottom">he who in after years was to make the name of Carthage glorious</a>
   among the peoples uplifted his hand of adjuration in the presence
   of his father.  From him out of whose original fount he came, and in whose
   depths his earliest waves of being found their noblest, their truest echo of
   response, most naturally did he draw that full tide of strength which
   through all barriers was to bear him on until he whelmed in the deluge of 
   inherited vengeance the territory of his foe.</p>
  <p>
   No
   <a href="Notes/n88733.html" target="bottom">Hannibal</a>
   was I, but the struggling sufferer under long soldered thrall of sorcery,
   groaning for a deliverance which I just dared to tempt; no
   <a href="Notes/n88733.html" target="bottom">Hamilear</a>
   wert thou,
   <a href="Notes/n70375.html" target="bottom">my father</a>,
   for the hands with which thou supportedst mine in their final vow of
   liberty were wet, not with the blood of war, but the tears of a most
   precious compassion; and as before thee, on that last night of my bondage,
   I took the oath which opened up my prison-doors, from thy presence I won a
   sustaining force of will which, through many a day of fray and weariness,
   was to press me on (in all reverence to the majestic memorials of past
   time) against a mightier, a subtler enemy than Rome!</p>
  <p>
   After thus sealing my deliverance, my next step was to discover the author
   of
   <a href="Notes/n61038.html" target="bottom">the article in Putnam’s</a>,
   which had determined me to it at first.  This, through the kind courtesy of
   some of its presiding minds, I was in a few days enabled to do.  To the
   author I then wrote, trusting to no other introduction than that of our
   common ground and the sympathies of human nature.  I asked counsel upon the
   best means of softening the pathway of my escape, for I had seen enough in
   my former effort to assure me that it would be a very hard one.  Moreover,
   the simple possession of a letter from one who had been so instrumental in
   originally effecting my release would be a powerful aid toward rendering it
   permanent.</p>
  <p>
   A very short time elapsed before I received an answer to my inquiries.  My
   anxiety could not have made it more full than it was of information and
   assistance; my gratitude could not have exaggerated the value of its
   sympathy and encouragement.  But for the sacredness which to a mind of any
   refinement invests a correspondence of such nature, I could not refrain
   from here giving it publicity.  It strengthened my resolution, it opened
   for me a cheering sky of hope, it pointed me to expedients for insuring
   success, it mitigated the sufferings of the present.  It is, and ever will
   be, treasured among the most precious archives of my life.</p>
  <p>
   Thus supported humanly, and feeling the ever-near incitement and sustenance
   of a Presence still higher, I began to feel my way out of the
   <a href="Notes/n68307.html" target="bottom">barathrum</a>
   of my long sojourn, and its jaws closed behind me, never since then, never
   hereafter till there be no more help in heaven, to open for my ingress.
   Out of its tremendous
   <a href="Notes/n00575.html" target="bottom">Elysium</a>,
   its quenchless
   <a href="Notes/n70558.html" target="bottom">Tartarus</a>,
   its speechless revelations, I came slowly into a land of subdued skies and
   heavier atmosphere.  The jet of flame and fountain grew dimmer behind me in
   the mists of distance; broader, in the land from which I had long wandered,
   before me grew the shadows of the present life.  Yet among all the lights
   which, unobscured by vapor, from afar led me on my way, was one which
   gleamed with a promise that in the days hereafter, the soul, purified from
   the earthy, should once more, painlessly, look on the now abandoned glories
   of its past apocalypse.</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2>
  Chapter XX.
  Leaving the Schoolmaster, the Pythagorean sets up for himself.
  </h2>
  <p>
   During the progress of the events which have hitherto occupied my
   narrative, I had become a graduate of my college.  Willing for a while to
   defer the prosecution of more immediately professional studies, I cast
   about for some employment which for a year might engage a portion of my
   efforts, and leave, at the same time, a reasonable amount of leisure for
   private reading.  As is the case with so many of our newly-fledged American
   alumni, my choice fell upon the assumption of the pedagogic purple.  There
   were doubtless, somewhere in the States, candidates for induction into the
   mysteries of the Greek and Latin tongues — some youths of promise who
   burned for an acquaintance with the arts of address, and who would not
   scorn to receive, even from the hands of an own countryman, the crumbs of
   literature which fall from the Gallic table.  If my horoscope had not
   failed me, I could find them out.</p>
  <p>
   Accordingly, at the bar of my college, whither petitions for instruction
   very frequently came in from the benighted world, I lodged an application
   for the most eligible situation of the kind above stated which should
   present itself.  Before long a letter reached me, offering a post of
   teachership, situated somewhere between the Hudson and Fort Laramie, in a
   village glorified with some name of Epic valor, mighty in the appanage of
   ten dwelling-houses and a post-office, and, like all places sanctified by
   the presence of the educational genius, “refined, salubrious, and highly
   religious.”  As to the first item in this latter statement, there was every
   reason to be satisfied of its truth, since the writer of the letter was
   evidently a gentleman, and, to judge from the size of the place, he was a
   very large integral portion of its population.  Upon the second point it
   was rather more difficult to be assured, since any number of deaths
   possible to the dimensions of the village might have occurred there without
   their wave of agitation reaching the shore that acknowledges the
   jurisdiction of bills of mortality.  Finally came the question of
   “highly-religiousness.”  On this head, nothing could have given my doubts a
   more decisive quietus than the fact that the community wanted a teacher,
   since, just then looking through the
   <a href="Notes/n21615.html" target="bottom">Lorraine-glass</a>
   of enthusiasm for a chosen occupation, I saw a peculiar force and beauty in
   the words, “Science, the handmaid of Religion.”  Yet one thing there was
   which stood as a slight obstacle in the way of accepting the position.  I
   had determined, for the year to come, to be independent for a support of all
   aid save my own exertions.  Entire self-sustenance was a very dear project
   with me.  Could I hope for it there?</p>
  <p>
   My correspondent informed me that no very great pecuniary inducements could
   be offered, but seductively added that, to a young man of excellent
   principles, who desired to establish himself as a moral centre in the
   community, no opening could be more promising.  As he did not go on to
   advise me whether, in his portion of the country, “moral centres” were
   gratuitously fed, lodged, and clothed, besides being generously presented,
   as a slight token of popular esteem, with their laundry-bills, fuel,
   lights, and stationery, I concluded not to close with his offer, thus
   forever losing, for the basest of earthly considerations, the priceless
   opportunity of radiating circular waves of an unctuous excellence through
   it is impossible to tell how large an area of uninhabited timber-region.
   Whether any sufficiently self-sacrificing incumbent has been found to fill
   the rejected vacancy, from want of data is uncertain; if not, the place
   with the Homeric name wanders in heathen ignorance to this day.</p>
  <p>
   Another application which came to me, seeming in all points satisfactory,
   was accepted.  In the town of
   <a href="Notes/n73953.html" target="bottom">W——</a>,
   in the State of New York, a cry had gone up for a teacher, who might be
   absorbent as well as radiant, and one, moreover, who might indulge the hope
   of moderate leisure for his own self-disciplinary purposes.</p>
  <p>
   There, as I began arranging matters for my departure from home, I flattered
   myself that a stated occupation should absorb me from regrets over the loss
   of my old indulgence; quiet, books, and a regular life should create in me
   a new stimulus and energy.  The department of pedagoguery over which I was
   to be installed was congenial to long-consolidated tastes — the ancient
   and the English classics.  Thus I should gradually emerge out of shadows
   into a being with new motives, and by moderate cares blunt the pains of
   progress.  How far I harvested my hope the sequel will show.</p>
  <p>
   Having reached the scene of my labors, I found myself associated with a
   teacher who, like myself, was a new-comer, yet not, like myself, a neophyte
   in the profession, for he had grown venerable in
   <a href="Notes/n95214.html" target="bottom">the priesthood of Minerva</a>,
   having, in all probability, during his previous life, offered up numerous
   <a href="Notes/n95000.html" target="bottom">hecatombs</a>
   of youthful victims, both male and female, upon her altar.  At the same
   time that I congratulated myself upon possessing the aid of his experience,
   I discovered that I must look elsewhere for congenial sympathies, since he
   was one of those persons whose metal is not annealed.  In youth he had
   indulged a happy disposition, but now saw the folly of it.  Through some
   fault of my own early training, I was unable to discover the necessary
   connection between sanctity and acridity, a heart like
   <a href="Notes/n04023.html" target="bottom">Enoch</a>
   and a face like Sphinx.</p>
  <p>
   Yet upon external sympathy I did not expect to be very dependent.  The
   institution in which I was resident offered that invaluable advantage, a
   large and well-selected library, where I hoped to find all those choice
   attachments which from without my position might deny me.</p>
  <p>
   In a good library how swiftly time melts away!  Not merely in the sense of
   its rapid passage through our absorption in other interests, but as an
   element in any consideration, it becomes entirely neglected.  In practical
   business the present is our only actuality; the past has been cast down
   like a ladder whose rounds have helped us up to a height whence we never
   again expect to descend.  Among books, all temporal successions are
   obliterated; Plato and
   <a href="Notes/n66469.html" target="bottom">Coleridge</a>
   walk arm-in-arm; genial
   <a href="Notes/n75372.html" target="bottom">Chaucer</a>
   and loving
   <a href="Notes/n27331.html" target="bottom">Elia</a>
   shake hands; with them, with all, we stand enraptured upon the same plane
   of time, in one age, the ceaseless age of the communion of souls.  Well did
   <a href="Notes/n66709.html" target="bottom">Heinsius say, as he locked
   himself into the library of Leyden, <i>Nunc sum in gremio
   sæculorum!</i> — “Now I am in the lap of eternity!”</a></p>
  <p>
   But gradually the increasing pressure of duties connected with my new
   vocation more and more deprived me of leisure for enjoying any other
   literature than that of text-books.  Long after the last noisy foot had
   pattered down the front steps of the school building did my table groan
   with incorrigible exercises which demanded correction, one leaf of which,
   laid upon the grave of any worthy —
   <a href="Notes/n86784.html" target="bottom">Molière</a>,
   for instance — who spoke the language which it assassinated, would have
   brought up as deep a groan from the depths below
   <a href="Notes/n94663.html" target="bottom">as when the mandrake is uprooted</a>.
  </p><p>
   I had promised myself regular habits; but the wanderer who was so
   unfortunate or so eccentric as to be shelterless at that hour, might have
   seen, at two or three o’clock of almost every morning, the light of my lamp
   shining through one of the tall windows that looked upon the street.  Not
   that I rose early, but that
   <a href="Notes/n81619.html" target="bottom">I retired early — in the morning</a>.
   It was not
   the mere sense of duty and responsibility which impelled me to such labors
   for the school, although, indeed, these had their just, perhaps their
   exorbitant weight with me.  An element more selfish entered into the
   consideration — the dread of being haunted on the morrow by unappeased
   ghosts of business.  The accumulative nature of work distressed me; the
   slightest thing left unfinished at the close of one day added itself to the
   labors of the next, and it had grown mightily during the night.  There are
   some people so constituted that they can not slur matters if they would.
   No one else may notice
   <a href="Notes/n84616.html" target="bottom">the mint, anise, and cummin
   which they have forborne to tithe, but they can no more themselves overlook
   the deficiency than if they had neglected the weightier matters of the
   law</a>.</p>
  <p>
   It will be easily understood that late hours, hard work, and an almost
   total cessation from bodily exercise were not the best means that could
   have been taken to restore tone and elasticity to a mind struggling with
   the horrors of an abandoned stimulus.  Without cares of some kind, I had
   doubtless been at this time a most unhappy being; yet, under such pressure
   as I then felt, an overtasked mind had no opportunity to recover itself,
   but rather grew sensitive daily to the loss of its former support.
   Perhaps, however, even such a state of things was better than an absence of
   all absorbing employment; for, although I dreaded a return to hasheesh as
   an upright man dreads the violation of his most sacred oath, I had not
   reached a point at which I could utterly execrate the drug.  The only feat
   of righteous indignation which was then possible was to think ill of it, as
   the lover of a faithless mistress whom he must abandon, or as the patriot
   of his fatherland, swayed by vile rulers, when,
   “fallen upon evil times,”
   he flies it in voluntary exile.  Unemployed with daily and perplexing
   duties, I might have heard the former siren-voice floating into my careless
   quiet, and, step by step, have been almost unconsciously led back into the
   old snares.</p>
  <p>
   As it was, the fascinations of the past were hard enough to resist.  If
   ever for a moment I granted myself leisure to sit still and think — if,
   especially, I resigned myself with closed eyes to the train of meditations
   set in motion by good music, I was infallibly borne back into the hasheesh
   world, and placed face to face with its now irretrievable glories.  In
   quick flashes the old empurpled heights for a moment broke upon me, or amid
   cloud battalions in their rainbow armor I floated through a tremendous
   heaven.  Or the far windings of some wondrous river allured me into the
   luxuriant shadows which trembled over its brink, and I sighed for an
   instant with an unutterable yearning as I thought that its waves were never
   more to upbear my shallop of
   <a href="Notes/n43188.html" target="bottom">gramarye</a>.  The embodied
   temptation of exquisite
   <a href="Notes/n31875.html" target="bottom">houris</a>
   swam in ethereal dance down
   <a href="Notes/n60233.html" target="bottom">a garden of Gul</a>:
   never more were their rosy arms to embrace me.  Grand temples reared their
   spotless pediments into a sapphire sky; a lake that answered back in its
   own hue the look of heaven, kissed, dimpling with a fairy laughter, the
   steps that ascended to their portals — portals eternally barred on me.  And
   sometimes, more solemnly alluring than all these, for an instant I caught a
   view of that light wherein I had of old read the sublime secrets of things
   by unbearable apocalypse.  At such a season, well — oh! unspeakably well
   was it that
   <a href="Notes/n24058.html" target="bottom">hundreds of miles</a>
   stretched between me and the nearest box of
   hasheesh, for, had I possessed the means, I should have rushed to the
   indulgence, though it were necessary to swim a whirlpool on the way.</p>
  <p>
   I made acquaintances at W—— who could play cunningly upon an instrument,
   that universal one, the piano, especially.  Knowing that there was no
   possibility of yielding to the allurement, I, often as possible, had them
   play for me, while I sat almost unconscious of any thing outward,
   abandoning myself to music-inspired visions.  Yet even then, perfectly
   assured that I had no power to gratify the hasheesh appetite, I have
   started up from my seat to dispel by walking and the sight of familiar
   objects a rapture which was enchanting me irresistibly.</p>
  <p>
   Constantly, notwithstanding all my occupation of mind, the cloud of
   dejection deepened in hue and in density.  My troubles were not merely
   negative, simply regrets for something which was not, but a loathing, a
   fear, a hate of something which was.  The very existence of the outer world
   seemed a base mockery, a cruel sham of some remembered possibility which
   had been glorious with a speechless beauty.  I hated flowers, for I had
   seen the enameled meads of Paradise; I cursed the rocks because they were
   mute stone, the sky because it rang with no music; and the earth and sky
   seemed to throw back my curse.</p>
  <p>
   An abhorrence of speech or action, except toward the fewest possible
   persons, possessed me.  For the sake of not appearing singular or ascetic,
   and so crippling my power for whatever little good I might do, I at first
   mingled with society, forcing myself to laugh and to talk
   conventionalities.  At last associations grew absolutely unbearable; the
   greatest effort was necessary to speak with any but one or two to whom I 
   had fully confided my past experience.  A footstep on the stairs was
   sufficient to make me tremble with anticipations of a conversation; every
   morning brought a resurrection into renewed horrors, as I thought of the
   advancing necessity of once more coming in contact with men and things.
   Any man who has felt the pangs of some bitter bereavement can understand
   this experience when he remembers how many a time he awoke after his
   affliction, and for a moment remained forgetful that it had fallen upon
   him.  Then suddenly gathering a fearful strength, the knowledge of the
   reality flashed upon him, and he groaned aloud as if some fresh arrow had
   entered his soul.  At times the awakening was so terrible an experience to
   me that from any other than my own hand I would have courted death as a
   mercy.  The death which was but another birth and possible, the death which
   was utter extinction and an impossibility, seemed either of them preferable
   to that illusion into which the light aroused me, which men called life,
   but which was, after all, but death in its most horrible form, death
   vivified, stalking about in hollow pageantry, breathing meaningless
   utterances, interchanging salutations, mocking spirit by gestures without
   spirit, and unable to return to its legitimate corruption.</p>
  <p>
   Aware as I was that this terrible state was the revenge of the rejected
   sorceress, and feeling it grow bitterer every day to bear, I began to
   struggle against two temptations, yielding to either of which seemed to
   offer some change of suffering, if not a permanent relief.  One of these
   was self-destruction, the other return to hasheesh, and I can hardly
   pronounce which of the two was the most abhorrent idea.  Either of them
   ultimately led in the same direction.  My argument with myself was, that
   there must be some turning point, some lowest depth to the abyss which I
   was descending; the hope I could not see, but faith clung to it
   desperately, and ever kept repeating,</p>
  <blockquote><a href="Notes/n17034.html" target="bottom">
   “Behold! we know not any thing;<br />
   &nbsp;I can but trust that good shall fall<br />
   &nbsp;At last — far off —”
  </a></blockquote>
  <p>
   But, though day was terrible, night was often as much so.  While indulging
   in hasheesh, none of its images had ever been reproduced in dreams,
   provided that I retired to sleep thoroughly restored from the last dose.
   Indeed, it is a singular fact, that although, previously to acquiring the
   habit, I never slept without some dream more or less vivid, during the
   whole progress of the hasheesh life my rest was absolutely dreamless.  The
   visions of the drug entirely supplanted those of nature.</p>
  <p>
   Now the position of things was transposed.  Day was a rayless blank, night
   became frightful with fire.  The first phenomenon which I began to notice,
   as I entered this condition, was the peculiar susceptibility of the brain
   to its last impression before my chamber was darkened.  Did I look at the
   flame of the lamp before putting it out? — for an hour afterward I lay
   tossing and sleepless, because one fiery spot burned unquenchably upon the
   surrounding blackness.  Did I shut the pages of a book immediately before
   lying down? — the last sentence I had read was as distinctly printed on
   the dark as it could have been upon a scroll, and there for half the night
   I read it till it grew maddening.  Well was it for me if the words were not
   of gloomy import, for I could endure with measurable patience even the
   wearily monotonous assurance of good cheer; but one night I was forced to
   rise and relight my lamp to blot out the sight of such an awful sentence as
   this:</p>
  <center>
   <a href="Notes/n15065.html" target="bottom">“Depart, ye cursed!”</a>
  </center>
  <p>
   At length I used the habitual precaution, borrowed from my former usage in
   the hasheesh state, of keeping one wick of my lamp burning while I slept.
   At first this was very painful to my eyes; but so much better was any pain
   than the horror of that last permanency of the final impression, that I
   bore it willingly.</p>
  <p>
   Gradually my rest began to be broken by tremendous dreams, that mirrored
   the sights and echoed the voices of the former hasheesh life.  In them I
   faithfully lived over my past experience, with many additions, and but this
   one difference.  Out of the reality of the hasheesh state there had been no 
   awakening possible; from this hallucination of dreams I awoke when the
   terrors became too superhuman.</p>
  <p>
   What has been said in an earlier part of this narrative upon the indelible
   characteristic of all the impressions of our life seemed to find
   illustration here.  Doomed to re-read the old, yet, though sometimes
   forgotten, never obliterated inscriptions, I wandered up and down the halls
   of sleep with my gaze fixed upon the mind’s judicial tablets.  Not always
   were the memories in themselves painful; where of old I had felt ecstasy,
   in the same place I rejoiced wildly now; yet the close of that season of
   rejoicing was often tinged with most melancholy dye, for, from my
   recollection of the former order of succession, I could infallibly tell
   what was coming next, and many a time was it a vision of pain.</p>
  <p>
   All the facts of a recalled experience took their regular relative position
   save one — I never dreamed of taking hasheesh.  I was always seized
   suddenly by the thrill; it came upon me unexpectedly, while walking with
   friends or sitting alone.  This ignorance of any time when I took the dose
   did not, however, absolve me from self-convicting pangs.  Invariably my
   first cry was, “I have broken my vow!  Alas! alas!”  Then followed furious
   exultancy.  I rushed like a
   <a href="Notes/n79888.html" target="bottom">Maenad</a>
   through colossal scenery; I leaped unhurt down measureless cataracts; I
   whirled between skies and oceans, both shining in fiery sapphire; I stood
   alone amid ruined piles as vast as
   <a href="Notes/n78190.html" target="bottom">the demon-built palaces of Baly</a>.
   Then an undefined horror seized me.  I fled from it to find my friends, but
   there were none to comfort me.  Finally, reaching the climax of pain, I
   caught fire, or saw the approach of awful presences.</p>
  <p>
   Then I awoke.  But not always into the delicious comfort of a calm reality
   — I may almost say, never; ordinarily to cry out to Heaven for the boon of
   an unpeopled darkness; always to find the beating of my heart either
   totally stopped, or so swift and loud that I could hear it with the utmost
   distinctness, like a rapid, muffled hammer; frequently to discover that the
   idea of fire had some ground in a raging fever, which parched my lips, and
   swelled the veins upon my forehead till they projected in relief.  At such
   times my course was to rise and walk the floor for an hour, if need were,
   at the same time bathing my head until the heat was assuaged.</p>
  <p>
   If memory, still blunted by the body, could thus clearly and faithfully
   read her old records, in what astonishing apocalypse shall they stand forth
   at the unerring wand of the disembodying change!</p>
  <p>
   I have spoken of additions to the original scroll of visions.  It remains
   to mention some of them.</p>
  <p>
   The region around W—— is a limestone formation, tunneled in one place by
   a rather extensive and remarkable cave.  I have never found there any of
   those lofty halls and vast stalactites which render certain other caverns
   famous; the calcareous depositions are very much in miniature, but some of
   them of a most delicate beauty.  One, in particular, is a most perfect
   statuette (if the term may be allowed in such a connection) of Niagara
   Falls; the Rapids, Goat Island, with its precipitous battlement toward the
   lower river, the American Fall, the Horse-shoe, all are there, exquisitely
   carved, on
   <a href="Notes/n03481.html" target="bottom">a scale of not quite an inch to the foot</a>.
   Another is a Gothic
   monastery, with its shrine and Madonna just outside the grille, and a
   cresset hanging from the point of the portal’s arch.  The chambers are
   often narrow and sinuous; there is nothing there to astound any one who has
   visited Weyer’s Cave or the Mammoth; but as this was the only one that I
   had ever seen, it was there that I found my cavernous ideal.</p>
  <p>
   My guide through it was a young man of the neighborhood, whose
   gratification in obliging a stranger was the only recompense which he would
   not refuse; yet dear enough was the price which I paid for my visit.</p>
  <p>
   It was no less than the punishment of being cavern-haunted for weeks.
   Nightly I was compelled to explore the most fearful of subterraneous
   labyrinths alone.  Now climbing crags which gave way behind me, hanging to
   round projections of slippery limestone, while I heard the dislodged
   débris go bounding down from ledge to ledge of a yawning pit of
   darkness and reaching no bottom.  Now crawling painfully like a worm,
   pushed on through winding passages no wider than a chimney, by a Fate whose
   will I doubted ever to bring me back.  Now beholding far above my head the
   rifted ceiling tremble with the echo of my least footstep, in momentary
   agony to see it fall.  Now joyfully hastening toward a glimpse of daylight,
   coming up to it, and falling backward just in time to save myself from
   plunging down some sheer wall of measureless height, upon which the
   labyrinth opened.</p>
  <p>
   From that visit to the W—— cave I suffered that which only the
   hasheesh-eater and a soul in the other hell can suffer.  In time, however,
   I slowly outgrew its memory, but only to replace it by others almost as
   fearful.  I cite but one more in this place.</p>
  <p>
   I had been sitting upon the window-sill one day, with my body partly
   outside, for the purpose of performing some repair upon the sash.  My sleep
   thereafter was scared by a vision of a house supernaturally high, upon
   whose topmost window-sill I stood, holding on by a projecting cornice with
   one hand, while with the other I sought to perform some impossible purpose,
   which prevented it from assisting its mate.  Still the cornice kept
   crumbling.  I grasped it by a fresh projection.  That also gave way;
   another, and that was broken by my grasp.  This position was brought to a
   crisis in several ways.  Sometimes by a powerful impulse I swayed myself
   inside, and the current of the dream changed.  Sometimes, without my 
   knowing how, the vision passed utterly away.  Once the whole building on
   whose side I stood from basement to cap-stone took fire in an instant; I
   leaped to the more merciful, to avoid the more cruel death, and, awaking,
   found myself upon the floor in one of those feverish states of which I have
   spoken.</p>
  <p>
   That night I slept no more.  At dawn I laid myself down for an hour of
   disturbed slumber, to awake again to a day which was as much to be dreaded
   as the night.</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2> Chapter XXI.
  Concerning
  <a href="Notes/n42035.html" target="bottom">the Doctor; not Southey’s</a>,
  but mine.
  </h2>
  <p>
   At the time of my greatest need, I was so fortunate as to make the
   acquaintance of one man whose sympathy was, for months of trial, one of my
   strongest supports.  Half discouraged in my attempts at self-rescue, I
   passed an hour in conversation with him, and fortitude came to me anew; for
   soul and its connection with the body had so long been his study that he
   knew how, with the utmost delicacy, to turn thought out of unwholesome
   channels; moreover, he had the heart as well as the brain for doing good.
   I need not say that he was a doctor.</p>
  <p>
   I can not resist the temptation to a digression in this place for the
   purpose of giving my testimony, for the highest that it is worth, to one
   fact of past experience.  It is this: if I have ever met a man before 
   unknown to me, whose sympathies flowed instinctively toward distress, whose
   self-sacrifice had become an inseparable part of nature, whose
   comprehensive interest in all that might ennoble our kind was equaled only
   by his loving patience with its present infirmities, I have called him
   “doctor,” and, nine times in ten, have not been mistaken.</p>
  <p>
   Society has now grown old enough, for the sake of self-respect at least, to
   despise and abandon those stale jokes upon doctors which tickled her
   childish ear.  With her superstition of the value of a horse-shoe as
   prophylactic against witches, let her also put aside the inanities which
   she talks, in her less sombre mood, of the physician in league with the
   <a href="Notes/n53488.html" target="bottom">sexton</a>, and the solemnity
   of mock-learning which reigns over a circle of
   <a href="Notes/n07541.html" target="bottom">gold-headed canes</a>.
   When frightened, she is ever ready to send for the doctor; she stops joking
   as soon as she is parturient, apoplectic from last night’s surfeit, or
   appalled at the consequences of having swallowed a button.</p>
  <p>
   True, there are empirics in medicine.  There are men who tamper with the
   delicate springs of life upon no other authority than that of a
   <center><a href="Notes/n13574.html" target="bottom">
    “possunt quia posse videntur.”
   </a></center>
   We have all seen the advertisement of one “whose sands of life have nearly
   run out,” and as we marvel at the length of time during which those sands
   have been just on the verge of their final down-flow, we are led to ask if,
   for the sake of that world upon which an incalculable benefit in cases of
   consumption may be conferred for the price of one shilling, the benevolent
   possessor of the recipe may not occasionally have tipped up his hour-glass
   or diminished its aperture.</p>
  <p>
   We all know the quack in medicine.  We are not blind to the thousand
   astonishing cures of as many desperate maladies, to the placards on the
   highways, the columns of the press, the almanacs, the guides, the angels
   that come down in a hurry from heaven, calling through a trumpet to the
   moribund to hold on till they get there, with a bottle of sirup under each
   arm which shall restore peace to his afflicted family.</p>
  <p>
   All these things we know; yet are there no other quacks than quacks in
   medicine?  Are there no quacks of divinity? no quacks at law? no political
   quacks, that dose a diseased nation? no literary quacks, who break down the
   æsthetic constitution of the people?  But, because
   <a href="Notes/n16700.html" target="bottom">Brigham Young</a>
   points out the road to future blessedness through a phalanstery of wives,
   shall we no more go to church?  Because
   <a href="Notes/n26228.html" target="bottom">Jeffreys</a>
   was a villain, must no more causes be adjudicated?  And are we to abjure
   all faith in the science of government inasmuch as some
   <a href="Notes/n11591.html" target="bottom">placeman theorizes to the mob in fustian</a>
   during a campaign, or anathematize all authors in that somebody has
   befouled the pool of reading-mind by a volume of
   <a href="Notes/n87548.html" target="bottom">the Rag-picker’s Nephew?</a></p>
  <p>
   If we hold faith in gold, notwithstanding base metal, let us be assured
   that nowhere is that gold found at a higher percentage of purity than among
   doctors.  Where one
   <a href="Notes/n00436.html" target="bottom">Faun hath stolen the mantle of Esculapius</a>,
   as the good sire lay sleeping, there are a hundred upon whom he has dropped
   it as upon worthy children.</p>
  <p>
   Of all men, the doctor is to be peculiarly cherished.  Let us not forget
   that there was one season, very early in all our lives, when without him we
   might not have been.  Let us remember how often, uncomplainingly, he has
   deprived himself of sleep, of meat and drink, of all those social
   endearments which beautify the world to us, that we might be set at ease
   upon some whimsical ailment, some pulse too little or too much.  When the
   hour of a real need calls for him, with what anxiety he watches every flush 
   of cheek and wandering of eye, with what strategic skill he brings to an
   issue the battle between the forces of life and death, with what calm
   earnestness he throws his own energy upon our side, how with the very
   parental anxiety he watches hour after hour at the painful bed, with what
   eye of suspense he beholds the crisis come, and now, when he knows that a
   Greater than he has come silently into the consultation, waits until an
   unseen finger has touched the clogged fount of life, and given him reason
   to rejoice with them that do rejoice.</p>
  <p>
   In a deep sympathy, in tenderness, in allowance for human frailties, there
   is no man who meets us on the ways of life that more resembles that
   mightier Physician whose cures are felt in all the arteries of the world.
   Like Him, the doctor is compassionate, because, measurably with Him,
   <a href="Notes/n44015.html" target="bottom">“he knoweth our frame, he remembereth that we are dust.”</a>
   And, last of all, yet not least, be it not forgotten that there is waiting
   for us an hour of shadow in the Hereafter, when, all medicine failing us,
   save that grand one which is to cure us of the body which hath afflicted
   for years, the voices of farewell, mixed with weeping, that shall be heard
   around our pillow, will not lack one tone which hath cheered us on through
   so many remediable distresses, but among the last whom our closing eye
   shall gather in before it looks on the grand mysteries will be he who,
   yielding us up unwillingly to the Stronger, remains to help the beloved
   whom we can help no more — the doctor.</p>
  <p>
   It is hard to understand how any man who, like the physician, from morning
   till night, and often from night till morning again, is occupied with
   enginery and the repair of this complicated system of forces, the body,
   should rest contented with a mere external survey of the levers and pulleys
   of its machine, or the chemical phenomena of its laboratory.  If he be the
   true man of science which his profession imperatively demands, he can not
   help perceiving, in a multitude of instances, that some intangible agent is
   working out processes for good or ill which do not array themselves under
   any material classification.  Changes are taking place which do not seem to
   originate in the specific function operated upon; new elements enter the 
   consideration of death or cure which can not be referred to food or
   medicine.  The true physician will not be contented until he has gone back
   of the wheels, and investigated the nature of that strange imponderable
   force which is energizing them.  To him the spiritual in his art is of even
   more importance than the bodily.</p>
  <p>
   I have not, after all, been making a very wide digression, since it has
   just led me into the description of my friend the doctor — to me, the
   doctor by eminence, since, spiritually, he did for my recovery that which
   none else could, in a life-time, have accomplished for it corporeally.</p>
  <p>
   All his life he had been communing with the great and beautiful thinkers to
   whom our mysterious double nature was a beloved study.  Yet no man
   perfected in mere book-lore was he.  Without seeking apologies wherewith to
   excuse himself from following in the train of the dogmatists of any age, he
   had thought for himself, and, in the possession of an inner world thus
   acquired, he was independent of other resources to an extent which was
   equaled only by my hasheesh kingship, and by that only in degree and not in
   permanency.  With him the spirit of all things was as much a felt presence
   as their gross embodiment is to material men.</p>
  <p>
   From the commencement of our acquaintance I was as much with him as the
   pressure of cares would allow me to be, and, when my own life had become to
   me a vague and meaningless abstraction, by participation with his thought
   and sympathy I somehow gradually drew into it an injected energy which made
   its juiceless pulses throb again, and awoke me out of the lethargy into
   which I was sinking deeper with every day.  For months, but for him, the
   allotted course of my duties had been a mechanical round; a galley-slave, a
   mill-horse, could not have labored with less interest or more weariness.</p>
  <p>
   As the mountain of exercises and compositions grew gradually more and more
   level with the plane of my table, and the evening wore on toward night, I
   was wont to soliloquize, “One hour more, and I will go to see the Doctor.”
   Once at his rooms, and the iron mantle of pedagogic restraint fell off; I
   was in the human character again; nay, more, I seemed to take off my body
   and sit in my soul.  This very resumption of naturalness and freedom by one
   whose position demanded all day a peculiar self-control and reticence, will
   be understood by those whom fortune (or misfortune) has placed in like
   circumstances to be the most delicious privilege for which the tired mind
   can yearn.  The ceasing to seem to be what he is not must always be an
   untold relief to any one who has not, by long training in the necessary
   caution of a responsible place, utterly ceased to be what he was.</p>
  <p>
   Yet the benefit conferred upon me by my acquaintance with the doctor was
   something more than could be comprehended in this mere exchange of the
   technical for the natural, the life of a profession for the life of
   humanity.  A most kind and lively interest did he bestow upon all that
   pertained to my past enchanted existence, and never with more gentleness
   and care than he did could an own brother have supported me through the
   horrors wherein I was painfully journeying on my way to complete
   disenthrallment.  By condolence, by congenial converse, by suggestion of
   brighter things, by indication of a certain hope in the distance if I would
   but press on, in a thousand ways did this friend nerve me to persistent
   effort, and close more tightly behind me the gates of return.</p>
  <p>
   It was through his labors chiefly that I began once more to take an
   interest in the world, not through any renewed affection for its mere
   hollow forms, but for the sake of that inner essence which they embodied.
   Henceforth forever, after abandoning hasheesh, was all endurance with the
   external creation to be denied me unless I could penetrate deeper than its
   mere outside.  I had known the living spirit of nature; in its husks I no
   longer found any nourishment, but rather the material for a certain
   painful loathing to expend itself upon.  In my then present condition, I
   beheld as little beauty in the best of external things, I granted as little
   admiration, as any old Athenian whose eyes last fell on the divine and 
   spirit-breathing master-pieces of
   <a href="Notes/n72613.html" target="bottom">Phidias</a>,
   revivified to pass judgment upon some elaborately-carven gatepost.</p>
  <p>
   Through the aid of the doctor I began slowly to perceive the possibility of
   penetrating deeper than the shard of things without the help, so dearly
   bought, of hasheesh.  Taking up, for instance, the subject of a spirit
   which works throughout all creation, by which the most microscopic
   plant-filament, no less than the grandest mountain, is inwrought and
   informed, we often talked together in parables, which, however, were never
   obscure to us, since we possessed that best dictionary of meanings, the
   bond of a close, congenial sympathy.</p>
  <p>
   Let no one accuse us rashly of Pantheism, since it is not affirmed that we
   ascribed to that spirit of things divine, or in any way self-conscious
   attributes.  Thus, as we were one day standing side by side before a window
   exquisitely arabesqued with trees by the noiseless graver of the frost, did
   the doctor discourse upon its process and its reasons:</p>
  <p>
   “That the thing which men call dead matter has not wrought out this beauty
   is evident.  The matter is here, but a more subtle force has moulded it
   according to hidden laws.  The very necessary and primordial condition of
   matter is inertia, and without the touch of human hands inertia has here
   been overcome.  Look at that palm-tree.  We might shut out from our eyes
   its artificial frame, and all the other surroundings which connect it with
   man’s workmanship, and, as we gazed upon its articulate trunk, and the
   plumy shoots spreading from the expanded bud which forms the capital of the
   shaft, believe ourselves upon an oasis of Araby.</p>
  <p>
   “Wherein differs this palm-tree from its brothers of the desert, the
   tropical garden, and the bank of Nile?  In this only.  The
   <a href="Notes/n75051.html" target="bottom">spirit of a palm</a>
   has been viewlessly wandering from zone to zone in search of a body.  It
   reaches a warm land, and there, from ammoniacal soils, from water-atoms,
   from numberless elements, it slowly builds about itself, in conformance to
   its inner laws, roots, trunk, and branches, until some way-worn
   <a href="Notes/n51468.html" target="bottom">Howadji</a>
   throws himself down under its shadow, saying, ‘Blessed be Allah! another
   palm-tree.’</p>
  <p>
   “A second palm-spirit, in its ethereal journeyings, comes not to the earth,
   but hither to this window-pane.  Here it finds no soils, but only the
   water-drops, which all day long have been collecting from the atmosphere.
   Its visit is by night, and when we draw near the window in the morning, lo!
   the spirit has erected for itself a body of purest crystal, shaping it
   faultlessly, by its own unerring law, into the palm-tree which we see
   here.</p>
  <p>
   “To-morrow the spirit of the Alga may float hither for its incarnation, and
   on the day after the spirit of the Fern.”</p>
  <p>
   Had I possessed any part in the origination of this idea, I should not
   venture to characterize it as I now do, singularly beautiful; yet I believe
   that I shall not speak without hope of sympathy in saying that such it did
   certainly seem to me.  It chanced that in the long and severe winter which
   we passed together at W——, my friend and I had many opportunities of
   beholding the verification of his prophecy, for to our windows did come
   frequently both Fern and Alga, with many another spirit from the universal
   Flora, whose filaments and petals bitter blasts only breathed into more
   finished perfectness, and whose fragrance was a better, a more enduring one
   than that of odor, since it was exhaled to the soul without mediation of
   corruptible organs.</p>
  <p>
   As we looked upon the frost-glorified panes, our minds meanwhile tinged
   with this poetic theory, it was impossible to refrain from carrying up the
   analogy into a field which is vaster, and orbed by higher destinies than
   those of the unconscious creation.  To a certain body of the palm alone is
   the breath of winter fatal.  In the higher zones an incarnation reared of
   soils and earthy juices perishes and droops away; yet the spirit of the
   palm is not dead.  Wafted away,
   <a href="Notes/n02067.html" target="bottom">it collects for itself other materials to dwell in</a>,
   and crystallizes around itself a form which shall only be
   beautified and confirmed by that very power which destroys its other
   embodiment.</p>
  <p>
   There is another wind in Araby, called Sarsar, the icy wind of death, which
   blows not upon the tree, but on the man.  At its chill the bodily drops
   off, but the soul has never felt it.  Set free by the same breath which was
   lethal to its shell, it voyages into another region, it crystallizes around
   itself “a more glorious body.”  Who shall say that, to this new creation
   which it has informed, those very influences which worked the dismemberment
   of its ancient covering — labor, pain, attrition, and all the thousand
   forces of decay, shall not the more through all the ages act to ennoble the
   soul, to make it a grander, better, and more harmonious being?
   <a href="Notes/n28259.html" target="bottom">Shall he who so clothes the grass of the field, and much rather clothes us, though of little faith</a>,
   grant good uses of ill destiny to unconscious and not to conscious being?</p>
  <p>
   As a legitimate and by no means unexpected consequence of our living
   somewhat in seclusion, and holding both opinions and converse which were
   not absolutely universal, there were not wanting those who dubbed us
   visionary, the severest epithet of reproach which can be hurled by A.,
   whose horizon of interests is bounded by beef and clothes, at B., who
   inquires within a wider scope.  I do not remember that we ever writhed very
   convulsively under this fearful thunderbolt, but bore it as became not
   altogether annihilated, good-humored martyrs.</p>
  <p>
   As we talked of this subject upon a certain evening, thus spake the doctor
   in parable:</p>
  <p>
   “Once upon a time there abode in a bar of iron two particles of
   electricity.  Now one of these particles, being of an investigating
   temperament, to the great discredit of his family, and the shame and
   confusion of face of all who held high seats in the electric synagogue, set
   out upon a wild voyage of discovery.  For a long time he was absent, and,
   as no tidings came from him, it was supposed he had perished ignominiously
   at the negative pole.  In the mean while, the other particle of
   electricity, who staid at home and minded his own business, by gradual
   accretions had secured to himself size and dynamic consideration in the
   community.  After the lapse of several seconds (which must be known is a
   long period to individualities which travel as rapidly as the electric) the
   erratic particle returned, and visiting his friend, the particle who had
   attained a position of high respectability, happened to let fall in
   conversation this remark:  ‘I have discovered in my journeyings that we are
   not the only beings extant, but that, in fact, we live in and are
   surrounded by a body called iron, which, from our difference of state, it
   possessing a far greater density than we, we do not perceive.’</p>
  <p>
   “Thereat the other particle waxed wroth, and muttered something like
   ‘humbug!’  But the traveler, pressing the claim of his new fact, did so
   excite his respectable friend that he broke forth thus:  ‘Do you pretend to
   belie the evidence of my senses?  All my life I have been going up and down
   about my business, and have never yet seen, heard, smelt, tasted, or felt
   such a thing as iron in the whole time.  Why don’t I run my head against
   it?’  Since that day, it is credibly stated that whenever the practical
   particle stands on ’Change talking with other practical particles, and the
   inquiring particle comes along, the former shakes his head, and says to his
   friends, ‘Unreliable — talks nonsense about a crotchet which he calls iron
   — visionary, very visionary.’”</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2> Chapter XXII.  Grand Divertissement. </h2>
  <p>
   As the months went on, the fervor of my longing toward the former hasheesh
   life in some measure passed away, and in general the fascination to return
   did not present itself so much in the form of pining for an affirmative as
   loathing of a negative state.  It was not the ecstasy of the drug which so
   much attracted me, as its power of disenthrallment from an apathy which no
   human aid could utterly take away.  Yet even now there were seasons of
   absolute struggle in which I fought as against a giant, or more truly to
   the nature of things should I say, in which I resisted as against a demon
   <a href="Notes/n31875.html" target="bottom">houri</a>,
   for my tempter was more passing lovely than any thing on earth.</p>
  <p>
   As in the earlier period of my warfare, I now and then caught glimpses of
   ravishing delight, which, through some rift in the thick cloud elsewhere
   completely enveloping my daily life, broke in upon me for a moment, yet
   lasted long enough to prove that I could not yet write myself secure, that
   my integrity was not yet beyond corruption.</p>
  <p>
   Some of my readers will doubtless be amused, others pained, and a few
   disgusted at the childlike expedients to which I found it necessary to
   resort for the purpose of appeasing this renewed appetite for visions
   without a return to hasheesh.  There were three different sets of
   circumstances which almost infallibly brought on the longing.  It was never
   suggested by dark and stormy weather, since this was too much in consonance
   with my habitual mood to demand more than a passing notice.  The man who
   has lost an intimate friend does not pay much attention to murk and mist;
   it is sunshine which seems to mock his melancholy.  So in my own case did
   it happen.  The season of most intense longing was a day of clear sky and
   brilliant light.  That beauty which filled the heart of every other living
   thing with gladness, only spoke of other suns more wondrous rolling through
   other heavens of a more matchless dye.  I looked into the sky, and missed
   its former unutterable rose and sapphire; no longer did the whole dome of
   the firmament sound with grand unwritten music.</p>
  <p>
   It was a pain to look into that desert wilderness of blue which of old my
   sorcery had peopled for me with innumerable celestial riders, with cities
   of pearl and symphony-haunted streams of silver.  I shut my eyes, and in a
   moment saw all that I had lost.</p>
  <p>
   A night of brilliant moonlight brought me other repentings after my
   enchanted life, whose tone was not so high as those of the sunshine, but
   deeper and more enduring.  Wrapped in a melancholy which could not be
   imparted, I wandered by the hour through the beaming streets, and looked
   sadly around me to see the meanest object by the wayside
   </p><blockquote><a href="Notes/n08330.html" target="bottom">
    “Change<br />
    Into something rich and strange.”
   </a></blockquote><p>
   The stones beneath my feet gleamed like unhewn crystals.  The frosty
   fretwork on the panels of doors which I passed, at the touch of the divine
   Moon-Alchemist became exquisite filigrees of silver.  The elm-trees and the
   locust, shedding sparkles of radiance from their ice-incased twigs, might
   well have been
   <a href="Notes/n96729.html" target="bottom">those trees of gleamy ore</a>
   which Allah buried when man was cast out of Paradise.</p>
  <p>
   Yet mournfully I thought of the old days, when I would have walked down
   these shining ways as through an ever-lengthening vista of glories, when
   the moon-light would have fallen on me mysteriously empurpled, when over
   all the wondrous domain I had felt myself unquestioned sovereign, and out
   of the beauteous recesses of earth and sky sprite voices had musically
   hailed me to my kingdom.</p>
  <p>
   As I thought upon these things, now forever irretrievably abandoned to the
   past, I have wept — yes, though it be unmanly, I have wept to find myself
   a discrowned king, a sorcerer ravished of his wand, a god shorn of his
   glories.  I am not ashamed to remember that I did this; for if there be any
   ecstasy possible which we do not now feel imparted to us, if any excellency
   in things which does not now make itself tangible, it is no more
   ignominious to lament over it perished than to sigh after it tarrying.</p>
  <p>
   There was another, a bodily condition, which I always found it necessary to
   avoid if I would not be smitten with repinings after the hasheesh life.  It
   was the nervous sensitiveness induced by deprivation of tobacco.</p>
  <p>
   In smoking, if in nothing else, could I boast regularity of habit.  To be
   sure, for this regularity neither an unusually developed organ of order nor
   the possibility of any thing like a systematic arrangement in my
   multiplicity of labors was to be pre-eminently thanked.  To defer for an
   hour the nicotine indulgence was to bring on a longing for the cannabine
   which was actual pain.  When circumstances have occurred which made it
   impossible to smoke before entering my daily round of duties, until they
   closed I have hardly dared to shut my eyes, lest I should be borne
   incontinently out of the actual life into which necessity called me to a
   land of colossal visions.  If for a moment I yielded to the impulse, I was
   straightway in the midst of sky and landscape whose splendors were only
   less vivid than the perfect hallucinations of the fantasia.</p>
  <p>
   But I have not yet spoken of those expedients to which I resorted for
   relief and to avoid the necessity of resuming the use of hasheesh.
   Certainly, in them ingenuity, so far as I possessed any, was tortured to
   its utmost endurance.</p>
  <p>
   Sometimes I spent the few moments of leisure which during the day could be
   snatched from business in —
   <a href="Notes/n34299.html" target="bottom">mention it not confidently in
   Gath, breathe it not to the friend of thy bosom in Askelon</a>
   — blowing soap-bubbles.  Not that there is aught deserving of contempt in
   the enjoyment of that which has been made a philosophic toy by
<!-- note? -->
   one of the greatest of Anglo-Saxon sages
   — not that the pleasure of rare beauties from humble elements is of
   necessity an æsthetic heresy, but because the hasheesh-eater is well
   aware of the existence of critics, to whom all that is childlike is also
   childish, who quarrel with men for being perversely happy on moderate
   means, and with their Creator because he has not made all the little hills
   as high as
   <a href="Notes/n06717.html" target="bottom">Cotopaxi</a>.</p>
  <p>
   Yes, throwing down the wand of professional majesty, degrading myself to
   the level of the most callow neophyte of an infant class, did I take up the
   pipe, and, going into the presence of the nearest sunbeam (a course which,
   by the way, might well be followed by those who for their light go farther
   and fare worse), did I create sphere after sphere, not, as the grotesquely
   but unintentionally blasphemous
<!-- note? -->
   old poet
   hath it, snapping them off my fingers into space, but with careful hand
   taking rest over the back of a chair to counteract the tremulousness of
   over-anxiety not to tremble, did I inflate them to the maximum, and then
   sit wrapped up in gazing at their luxuriant sheen until they broke.</p>
  <p>
   There I found some faint actualization of my remembered hasheesh-sky, and
   where the actual failed there did the ideal, thus stimulated, come in to
   complete the vision.  Had time allowed me, I could have consumed hours in
   watching the sliding, the rich intermingling, the changes by origination,
   and the changes by reaction of those matchless hues, or hues at least so
   matchless in the real world that to find their parallel we must leave the
   glories of a waking life, and go floating through the firmament of some
   iridescent dream.
   <a href="Notes/n42506.html" target="bottom">Verily, he who would be meet
   for the participation in any joys must robe himself in humility and become
   as a little child.</a></p>
  <p>
   There was one other way in which I measurably reproduced the past for my
   innocent satisfaction.  Had I permitted, at certain seasons, any foreign
   eye to invade the sanctity of my room, it would have fallen, possibly with
   some surprise, upon a singular arrangement of the books upon my table into
   a form somewhat resembling those houses which children build at their
   play.  Yet the stranger would have very little suspected a
   <a href="Notes/n97403.html" target="bottom">clew</a>
   to the
   mystery in the fact that I had thus been embodying to myself the ideal of
   the ancient cavern or the resplendent temple in which many a day ago I had
   exulted through a whole evening, while the rocks echoed with strange music,
   or oracular voices spoke to me out of the inner shrine.  Had he asked me
   the secret, he had probably not been much the wiser for my answer.</p>
  <p>
   There is still another method, and by far the most efficient of all, by
   which I gratified the visionary propensity without returning to the old
   indulgence.  I had been advised by the counselor to whose article I
   originally owed my emancipation, whenever the fascination of the drug came
   upon me with peculiar power, to evade it by re-enacting some former vision
   upon paper.  A truly wise and well-considered counsel did I find this, and
   one which, whenever the possibility existed from any gap in my daily
   occupation, I followed scrupulously.  As would have resulted from once more
   superinducing the hasheesh delirium, my visions, marshaled out of memory,
   marched past beneath varying banners; some of them banded under hell-black
   flags, and others carrying the colors of a rainbow of the seventh
   heaven.</p>
  <p>
   From this reproduction of the past in the order in which it had occurred, I
   gained a double benefit, the pleasure of appeasing the fascination without
   increasing it, and the salutary review of abominable horrors without any
   more than the echo of a pang.  In this way some portion of the present
   narrative was sketched at first, but of necessity a very small one, since
   the pressure of business made my abode, even in the most innoxious
   dream-land, that only of a wayfaring man who turneth aside but for a
   night.</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2> Chapter XXIII.  The Hell of Waters and the Hell of Treachery. </h2>
  <p>
   It is not to be supposed, however, that, with all these expedients, I was 
   now leading a life of quite tolerable calm; on the whole, rather enviable
   for its ideal diversions, and free from most of those sufferings which, at
   its abandonment, if not before, Nature sets as her unmistakable seal of 
   disapprobation upon the use of any unnatural stimulus.  If, from a human 
   distaste of dwelling too long upon the horrible, I have been led to speak
   so lightly of the facts of this part of my experience that any man may
   think the returning way of ascent an easy one, and dare the downward road
   of ingress, I would repair the fault with whatever of painfully-elaborated
   prophecy of wretchedness may be in my power, for through all this time I
   was indeed a greater sufferer than any bodily pain could possibly make
   me.</p>
  <p>
   For many a month my nights, or whatever portion of them was given to sleep,
   were tormented with terrific visitations.  After a time Niagara began again
   especially to haunt me.  In every variety of dangerous posture, helpless, 
   friendless, frequently deserted utterly of every living being, I hung
   suspended over the bellowing chasm, or slid down crumbling cliffs toward
   the treacherous pavement of ever-shifting emerald.  But one consolation
   ever broke in upon my distress; it was that stony face, which mutely shared
   with me, beneath its everlasting veil, the terror of the waters.  Could I
   but crouch beside it in my dream, one element was wanting to my utter
   isolation.</p>
  <p>
   Yet it was not invariably for myself alone that I feared.  Sometimes a
   tremendous ship came floating up the river without a sign of life upon its 
   decks of man or beast.  Against the current it made headway without wheels 
   or sails, but on coming to a certain place always stood still.  I soon
   learned to foretell what was next coming, so that I groaned in the
   consciousness of an infallible prophecy of evil.  A shudder shook the
   river, as if some dire convulsion was breaking up from its measureless
   abysses, and then slowly did the giant vessel begin to sink, bow foremost.
   Slowly she settled till her fore-chains were out of sight; then came a
   tumultuous surging outcry of despair; the decks, the shrouds, the stays
   were populous with human beings, unseen until that moment of ruin, and
   still clinging with iron clutch to those vain supports for the life which
   could not last.  I saw them, one by one, lapped in as the green water
   mounted, and with the last bubble of their dying breath the main truck
   disappeared, and a moment more saw the river sliding onward as before.</p>
  <p>
   I have no idea how many times sleep rang changes of horror upon that
   dreadful dream, but often enough, indeed, to make me shudder with a 
   speechless pang whenever water flowed or a ship drifted into the vast area
   of my nightly vision.</p>
  <p>
   Gradually it grew the habitual tendency of my dreaming state to bring all 
   its scenes, whether of pleasure or of pain, to a crisis through some 
   catastrophe by water.  Earlier in the state which ensued upon my 
   abandonment of hasheesh I had been affrighted particularly by seeing men 
   tumble down the shafts of mines, or, as I have before detailed, either
   dreading or suffering some fall into abysses on my own part; yet now, upon
   whatever journey I set out, to cross the Atlantic or to travel inland,
   sooner or later I inevitably came to an end by drowning, or in the imminent
   peril of it.  It seemed singular to me, in the waking state, that I never
   made use of past experience, during terrific dreams, to assure myself that
   a certain danger was only imaginary.  Before abandoning hasheesh, in
   natural dreams I had frequently employed the power of logical deduction —
   which, in the case of many persons, remains tolerably active during sleep
   — saying to myself, “You were frightened by this same danger before, and
   it turned out to be only ideal after all;” upon which I immediately awoke,
   or beheld the danger pass away.</p>
  <p>
   Aware of this fact, I often determined, in the daytime, to rouse myself 
   from the distresses of the night by the same expedient, but when they came
   it was never once thought of.  That law of hasheesh operation by which all 
   existence is merged in the present, and there is no memory of having ever 
   lived in a previous state, was most consistently obeyed by the sleeping 
   horrors of abandonment.  There was no way so much as conjectured by which 
   the spell of reality might be broken, and the determination of the day
   being thoroughly ignored, the only remedy was to endure unto the end.</p>
  <p>
   Yet there was one most agonizing vision, whose close proved an exception to
   the ordinary watery catastrophe, and which stamped itself upon my mind with
   a vividness lingering, even while I was awake, for many days.  It also,
   like so many of the rest, was connected with Niagara.</p>
  <p>
   On a cliff below the Fall, elevated to a height above the water such as
   only hasheesh can give, I found myself seated upon a broad flat
   stone.</p>
  <p>
   Beside me, and resting her hand upon my own, sat a person whom I well knew,
   when awake, as a queenly woman of the world, who caressed society and was
   caressed by it in return.  So far as man has a right to weigh his neighbor
   in the scales of private judgment, she was utterly hollow, selfish, and
   politic almost for policy’s sake.  Indeed, I felt this, when awake, acting
   so powerfully as a repulsion, that had I, in actual life, found her so near
   me, I should have arisen and walked away for fear of showing her my true
   dislike.  Now, however, I did not stir, for a singular fascination held
   me.</p>
  <p>
   Presently she spoke, and called my attention to some object which was going
   down the river.  I turned to look, but almost immediately heard a grinding
   sound beneath me, and felt the stone on which I sat slowly sliding toward
   the edge of the cliff.  Facing about in an instant, I saw the woman gazing
   earnestly in another direction.  Soon again she called me to look at some
   appearance in the river.  Strangely reckless, I obeyed her.  The stone
   slipped forward once more.  This time I turned quick enough to detect her 
   hand just moving away from the side.  I sprang up; I caught her by the arm;
   I glared into her beautiful icy eyes; I cried out, “Woman! accursed woman!
   is this your faith?”  Now, casting off all disguise, she gave a hollow
   laugh, and spoke:  “Faith! do you look for faith in hell?  I would have
   cast you to the fishes.”  My eyes were opened.  She said truly.  We were
   indeed in hell, and I had not known it until now.  Wearing the same
   features, with the demoniac instead of the human soul speaking through them
   — wandering about the same earth, yet aware of no presence but demons like
   ourselves — lit by the same sky, but hope spoke down from it no more.</p>
  <p>
   I left the she-fiend by the river-brink, and met another as well known to
   me in the former life.  Blandly she wound to my side as if she would entrap
   me, thinking that I was a new-comer into hell.  Knowing her treachery, as
   if to embrace her I caught her in my arms, and, knitting them about her,
   strove to crush her out of being.  With a look of awful malignity, she
   loosed one hand, and, tearing open her bosom, disclosed her heart, hissing
   hot, and pressed it upon my own.  “The seal of love I bear thee, my chosen
   fiend!” she cried.  Beneath that flaming signet my heart caught fire; I
   dashed her away, and then, thank God, awoke.</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2> Chapter XXIV.
  The
  <a href="Notes/n91280.html" target="bottom">Visionary</a>;
  to which Chapter there is no Admittance upon Business </h2>
  <p>
   There are those philosophers who, in running the boundary-line between the
   healthful and depraved propensities of our nature, have left the longing
   for stimulus on the condemned side.  Notwithstanding all that I have
   suffered from the most powerful stimulant that the world possesses, I can
   not bring myself to agree with them.  Not because the propensity is
   defensible on the ground of being universal.  True, the Syrian has his
   hasheesh, the Chinaman his opium;
   <a href="Notes/n57801.html" target="bottom">he must be a poverty-stricken Siberian who lacks his ball of narcotic fungus</a>,
   an impossible American who goes without tobacco, and over all the world
   liquor travels and domesticates itself, being of all stimulants the most
   thoroughly cosmopolitan.  Yet, if we make this fact our basis, we are
   equally committed to the defense of the quite as catholic propensities
   toward lying, swearing, and hating one’s rival.</p>
  <p>
   But there is one ground upon which the righteousness of the tendency toward
   stimulants may be upheld without the fear of any dangerous side-issues,
   namely, the fact that it proves, almost as powerfully as any thing lower
   than direct revelation, man’s fitness by constitution and destiny by
   choice, for a higher set of circumstances than the present.  Let it,
   however, be understood what, in this instance, is meant by the tendency to
   stimulus.</p>
  <p>
   We do not mean that mere bodily craving which, shared equally in common by
   the most bestial and the most spiritual of men not disembodied, urges them
   alike to some expedient which will send their blood throbbing with a
   livelier thrill of physical well-being, blind them to the consideration of 
   disagreeable truths, and eclipse all thought by the dense shadow of the 
   Animal.</p>
  <p>
   That of which we speak is something far higher — the perception of
   <a name="quote23816" />the soul’s capacity for a broader being, deeper
   insight, grander views of Beauty, Truth, and Good than she now gains through
   <a href="Notes/n22990.html" target="bottom">the chinks of her cell</a>.
   It is true that there are not many stimuli which possess the power in any
   degree to satisfy such yearnings.  The whole catalogue, so far as research
   has written it, will probably embrace only opium, hasheesh, and, acting
   upon some rarely-found combinations of temperament, liquors.</p>
  <p>
   Ether, chloroform, and the exhilarant gases may be left out of the
   consideration, since but a few people are enthusiastic or reckless enough
   in the pursuit of remarkable emotions to tamper with agents so evanescent
   in their immediate, so fatal in their prolonged effects.</p>
  <p>
   But, wherever the yearning of the mind is toward gratifications of this 
   nature — where it is calling earnestly for a nobler excellence in all its
   objects, nay, even wearied, discontented with those it now has, shall we
   pronounce this state a right or a wrong one?</p>
  <p>
   Let us see what verdict we would give upon certain other yearnings.  When
   the poor man fences in for himself a little spot of waste land, he first 
   erects a dark and low cabin, that his
   <a href="Notes/n10322.html" target="bottom">household gods</a>
   may not be shelterless.  Pleased for a while by the hovel life, greatly
   better as it is than camping out upon the roofless moor, he feels all his
   aim satisfied, and insphered within the attainment of Nature’s response to
   sheer physical necessities.</p>
  <p>
   By-and-by, after the pleasures of not being cold, wet, exposed to
   suspicious eyesight, nor hungry (since he has a little potato-patch behind
   the cabin), have become somewhat odd to him, he happens to think, “How
   would a few flowers look before my door?  There is something inside of me
   which seems to approve of flowers; I think they would do me good.”  So the
   poor man wanders out into the wood, and there, in that most ancient and
   incense-breathing temple of our God, he kneels down on the turfy hassock,
   which Spring, that ever-young opener of the cathedral doors, has laid for
   him, and gently, without unearthing a fibre of their roots, lifts a clump
   of violets.</p>
  <p>
   When, a day or two afterward, we come along past the rude cabin, and as we
   lean over the fence to ask the tenant how he fares, what do we do when our
   eyes fall upon a little dot here and there of something more than ground, 
   or grass, or vegetables — azure faces looking brotherly up at the
   same-colored heaven?  Do we shake our heads, draw down our brows, purse our 
   mouths, and say, “Ah! dissatisfied with your circumstances, I see.
   Restless where Providence has placed you; grasping after visionary
   happiness; morbidly craving for what you have not; depraved taste!” and all
   that sort of thing?</p>
  <p>
   I had really flattered myself that I was going to make a pretty cogent
   combination out of this, of the à fortiori and reductio ad absurdum
   arguments, but I am afraid I have failed.  I fear that there are some
   people who <em>would</em> say exactly this.</p>
  <p>
   Yet I will restrict the “we” to you and to myself, my reader, since I know 
   that you have not the ability nor I the will to be guilty of so gross a
   speech.  <em>We</em>, then, certainly shall not say it.</p>
  <p>
   Let us finish the analogy.  A man who, during his childish (not his 
   childlike) years, was growing up into all that compacts, rounds out, and 
   confirms the animal, has in that time attended solely to those claims of
   nature which have a reference to assimilation and secretion.  With meat,
   drink, and raiment he was satisfied.  Practical men cherished him as a sort
   of typical fact of that other broader fact, the respectable community.</p>
  <p>
   Just at the moment that hopes of his “making something of himself” are at 
   their widest (I will not say “highest,” since there is no height to hopes
   of this kind, as ordinarily understood), he discovers that he has some
   other need hitherto unsuspected, and not coming under any caption in the
   catalogue of bodily well-being.  His soul wants beauty; its yearning will
   not be repressed.  For a while he is content with the discovery of that
   which springs up between his feet in this really very beautiful world.
   Absorbed in other aims, he had never noticed it before, and now it breaks
   upon him as from
   <a href="Notes/n14881.html" target="bottom">a new heaven and a new earth</a>.</p>
  <p>
   By-and-by he thinks that, since all this loveliness is transitory, liable
   to be obscured by clouds and bedraggled by storms, uprooted utterly or made 
   distasteful by the presence of a bad association which will not be exiled,
   his soul, as immortal and expansive, may find grander views in another 
   region.</p>
  <p>
   This other is the region of stimulus.  What shall we say to this man?  “You
   are morbid; you are depraved; your yearnings are unnatural and sinful; you
   must contract your wishes, or, at least, extend your arms sideways farther
   into the dark, not upward higher into the light?”</p>
  <p>
   No; a thousand times no!  Let us rather say thus:  “Man, in this your
   longing, you have the noblest testimony to the endless capacity for growth
   of that germ, your soul.  You can not believe more of her than she is, for
   you can not believe more of her than God believes, and He was assured that
   He had made her
   <a href="Notes/n29978.html" target="bottom">in His own image</a>.
   You do not, therefore, flatter yourself with the privilege of looking into
   things too high for you; there is nothing which you can conceive of as
   possible to your view which shall not be actual.  Your wish is approved by
   Heaven, for from Heaven came the constitution which made you capable of
   such a wish.  Your Creator does not condemn you, neither do we condemn
   you.”</p>
  <p>
   If that man therefore departs, and becomes addicted to the indulgence in 
   opium, hasheesh, or whatever other spell may in his case possess the power 
   of prying open for him the gates to more wondrous glories,
   <a href="Notes/n46956.html" target="bottom">shall not the blood of the man
   and the tears of ruined or bitterly sympathizing friends be upon our
   skirts?</a></p>
  <p>
   Nay, most just and noble-hearted reader, for that which we have said to him
   should be only the
   <a href="Notes/n59453.html" target="bottom">exordium</a>
   to another, a longer address.  It is not the 
   author’s will more than his province to be dictative, yet be indulgent if
   he shortly sketches it here.</p>
  <p>
   “You sin not in your yearnings.  Yet may you sin grievously, even against 
   the grand aim of those yearnings, by a certain suicidal gratification of
   them.  Were hasheesh, or opium, or aught else of kindred nature between the
   poles the only alternative to your former gross life in mere meat and
   drink, the only alternative even to remaining within the limits of your
   first acquired beauty, it were better indeed to use them than to dishonor
   your soul by following mere material aims, or by crippling her energies of
   expansion.</p>
  <p>
   “Yet this is not the alternative.  In Nature there is yet undiscovered
   glory, a spirit which gradually will interpenetrate you as you commune with
   her.  She is not a mockery, a sham, for a truthful essence indwells,
   informs her.  Be this communing one stimulus to you!</p>
  <p>
   “In Art there is also a spirit which you have not yet read.  As the spirit
   of Nature is the ideal of God, so is the spirit of Art the ideal of man,
   the mind which God has made.  With this also commune.  In your actions upon
   it, in its reactions upon you, you will rejoice in perceptions of a meaning
   in life which you never felt; you will have one more stimulus.</p>
  <p>
   “<a href="Notes/n38143.html" target="bottom">Around you are the starving to
   be fed, the naked to be clothed, the captive to be set free, the persecuted
   to be overshadowed by your wing, the benighted to be enlightened, the vile
   to be cleansed.</a>
   Do good as you have opportunity, and find one more stimulus in that.</p>
  <p>
   “The Infinite One is communing with this illimitable soul of yours to lift
   it higher.  At a hundred doors he comes in to you continually.  There are 
   breathings within you which are not of yourself.  Do you find yourself
   lower than you would be?  Straightway the standard of true height is shown
   to you, held in a hand which can help you up to it.  Are you obscured by
   the shadow of a misused past?  To you, when you muse in the twilight, come
   <a href="Notes/n68228.html" target="bottom">angels, like the two who came even to Sodom at evening</a>.
   There is hope of a better growth, a grander life; the light of a
   resurrection which shoots in from the time to come through the chinks of
   that sepulchre, your body.  Wait patiently — ah! for how few moments, and
   that sepulchre shall be a
   <a href="Notes/n56605.html" target="bottom">cenotaph</a>.
   Let that hope of an advancing future, with all its unveiling of
   mysteries, its impulse along the path of an ever more and more glorious
   career, its exhaustless Beauty, and Truth, and Good, be your last, your
   noblest, your unfailing stimulus, until the Ideal and the Actual become the
   same, and it be needed no longer.</p>
  <p>
   “But of the stimulus of drugs, of potions, beware.  For the sake of that 
   very majesty with which you justly wish to aggrandize your soul, beware.  
   Their fountains will be presently exhausted, and then you shall helplessly
   beat your breast, as without possibility of arising from the brink you draw
   in their foul, their maddening
   <a href="Notes/n31125.html" target="bottom">lees</a>,
   and curse yourself for slaying those noble powers which it was your longing
   to strengthen, to nourish, and to clarify.”</p>
  <p>
   Let this illustration be pardoned if, in spite of other intentions, it has 
   become a sermon.  The hasheesh-eater knows full well that not only in the 
   world, but in our own country, shamelessly vilified as it is by the
   ignorant of other lands with the opprobrium of an all-absorbing aim at
   gain, there are many of those spirits who can not steep themselves in
   oblivion of all but physical ends, who can not rest in the mere knowledge
   that they are getting so many houses, so many acres of land, so much
   respectable consideration, to be possessed while a wind is passing by,
   while a twilight is fading.  There are men who pine restlessly for riches
   which shall satisfy higher obligations of their being, shall endure longer,
   shall in themselves possess a nobler and more expansive essence.  They are
   right in this pining.  Yet if there be one voice which can speak from the
   gateway of a dangerous avenue to its satisfaction, that can say,
   <a name="quote80202" />“Ho there!
   pass by; I have tried this way; it leads at last into poisonous
   wildernesses,” in the name of Heaven let it be raised.</p>
  <p>
   And thus I excuse my sermon.</p>
  <p>
   There are those, no doubt, who in reading it will say, “Is it not
   inconsistent to advise this possible hasheesh-eater to ‘feed the hungry and
   clothe the naked’ after inveighing so much against practical aims just
   before?”  With a desire to anticipate this objection, I would here say that
   it is not against practical aims, but the making them the chief, the
   controlling ones.  Or, rather, even more boldly, not against practical aims
   at all, but against pseudo-practical.  Paradoxical as it may be, there is
   no man more thoroughly, more purely practical than he who is most truly
   ideal.  It is needless to suggest that the word “practical” is a derivative
   from the Greek verb “to do,” and is therefore most properly applied to the
   man who “does” the best for himself.  Now which of two beings thus does the
   best for himself, he who does it particularly for that part of him which,
   in a few days, he is to abandon forever, or he who does it to the part
   which is eternally to abide by him?  O practical men, judge ye.</p>
  <p>
   The most perfect spirituality of aim, moreover, is not violated by any 
   decent and orderly attention to the claims of the body.  Only let the house
   be not more beautified than the tenant, the servant fed and adorned above
   his master, and then no one in his senses can quarrel because either the
   servant or the house is well sustained for the master’s highest good.</p>
  <p>
   It is, no doubt, the perversion of this principle which has caused the word 
   “visionary,” most righteously belonging, by its first title, to souls of
   the grandest insight, to be held, together with the idea which it conveys,
   in contempt even by serious and thoughtful men.  Shallow persons, urging
   that claim to notoriety through extravagance, which they were aware they
   could not press to celebrity by greatness, have been disgusting humanity
   with their absurdities from
   <a href="Notes/n44292.html" target="bottom">the time that Diogenes coiled
   himself in his tub</a>
   down to the era of the last apostle who blew his trumpet through
   Broadway.  They have all glorified themselves with the name “visionary;”
   when the radiant mantle fell from the shoulders of the last ascending
   prophet who had worn it in reverence, it was snatched by the ancestor of
   all the unseemly clan — it cloaked the rags of his spiritual beggary
   during his lifetime, and at his decession it was handed down through every
   succeeding generation of impostors.  No better proof could be adduced for
   its primeval authentic dignity than the fact that there has never, within
   the memory of man, been a pseudo-poet, pseudo-philanthropist, or a pseudo-
   with any other termination, who has not tenaciously clung to the epithet as
   his birthright, his mark of the elect, his cross of the Legion of
   Honor.</p>
  <p>
   We can not wonder at the astonishment expressed by
   <a href="Notes/n00566.html" target="bottom">Rogers</a>,
   that most substantial banker of a most substantial country, when, after
   <a href="Notes/n50370.html" target="bottom">Byron</a>
   had dined with him, for the sake of the spiritual man, upon one potato and a
   glass of water, refusing all the English cheer set prodigally before him,
   the moneyed man finds that, within the next hour, his brother bard has
   dispatched a steak and a bottle of Port at his club-house!</p>
  <p>
   Yet this assumption of the spiritual where it does not exist — this
   counterfeit presentment of the true visionary, certainly ought not, among 
   thinking men at least, to discredit the real fact.</p>
  <p>
   There are, doubtless, more than one who, when they have heard this fine 
   word rung mournfully from some old watch-tower of conventional 
   respectability, as the knell of all confidence, all position, all esteem
   among men, or echoing portentously from
   <a href="Notes/n86583.html" target="bottom">the tripod of Sir Oracle</a>,
   big with evil omen to an unendorsed theory, have sighed for the ancient
   days when it beautified the
   <a href="Notes/n24394.html" target="bottom">threnody</a>
   over a dead seer, or pealed from the lips of harpers as they sang the
   forecast of a living sage.</p>
  <p>
   To its old place the “visionary” will never be restored until knaves cease
   to make it their claim to spurious reverence, or good men refrain from
   looking at every theory as unsafe which does not base its request for their
   attention upon some tendency to promote a bodily good or explain a bodily
   fact.  If the former can not, is it possible that the latter may not
   be?</p>
  <p>
   For him who shall reinstate that word there is a noble
   <a href="Notes/n60375.html" target="bottom">meed</a>
   waiting in the future.  The man who leaps into a stream and brings his
   drowning brother safe to shore is rewarded by the Humane Society with a
   medal, which he is proud to hand down to his children as their best
   inheritance.  If we are true men, Truth is brother to us all, and the
   representative of a great and good idea is Truth.  Help! then, help! until
   some one comes who shall place in the reverence of just thinkers.  Verily
   he shall not lose his reward.  But he must be a man of calm nerve as well
   as bold stroke; as able to take full in his face the outrageous pelting of
   the spray, as to wear the medal when he has wiped off the drops.</p>
  <p>
   Then shall the soul be held worthier than the body, not only in-, but 
   outside of the pale of speculative theology, and
   </p><blockquote><a href="Notes/n96315.html" target="bottom">
    “Then comes the statelier Eden back to man;<br />
    &nbsp;Then springs the crowning race of human kind.<br />
    &nbsp;May these things be!”
   </a></blockquote></p>
  </p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2> Chapter XXV.
  <a href="Notes/n64912.html" target="bottom">Cave Succedanea</a>.
  </h2>
  <p>
   I am not aware of the existence of any in this part of the world who are 
   now in the habit of using hasheesh.  Those persons to whom, at their
   request, I formerly administered it, for experiment’s sake, were satisfied
   with the one trial, upon my assuring them that any prolonged indulgence
   would infallibly lead to horrors.</p>
  <p>
   Yet, since it is not at all impossible that these pages may meet the eye of 
   those who, unknown to me, are incipient hasheesh-eaters, or who, having 
   tested to the full the powers of the drug, now find its influence a
   slavery, yet are ignorant of the proper means of emancipation, I will not
   let this opportunity pass for suggesting, through a somewhat further
   narrative of my own case, a counsel which may chance to be salutary.</p>
  <p>
   The hasheesh-eater needs particularly to resist the temptation of
   retreating, in the trials of his slow disenthrallment,
   <a href="Notes/n19389.html" target="bottom">to some other stimulus</a>,
   such as liquors or opium.  Against such a retreat I was warned by
   the same adviser whose
   <a href="Notes/n61038.html" target="bottom">article in the Magazine</a>
   had been my prime motor to escape.</p>
  <p>
   As in an early part of this narrative it has been mentioned, strong 
   experimental tendencies had led me, long before the first acquaintance with
   hasheesh, to investigate the effect of all narcotics and stimulants, not so
   much with a view to pleasure as to the discovery of new phases of mental
   life.  Among these researches had been opium.  This drug never affected me
   very powerfully, not in one instance producing any thing like
   hallucination, but operating principally through a quiet which no external
   circumstances could disturb — slightly tinged, when my eyes were shut,
   with pleasing images of scenery.  Its mild effect was probably owing to
   some resistant peculiarity of constitution, since I remember having once
   taken a dose, which I afterward learned, upon good authority, to have been
   sufficient to kill three healthy men, without any remarkable phenomena
   ensuing.  Several considerations operated with me to prevent my making
   opium an habitual indulgence, besides this fact of its moderate potency.
   This, of itself, might not have been sufficient, since the capability which
   I acquired in its use of sustaining the most prolonged and severe fatigue
   was in my case unexampled.</p>
  <p>
   In the first place, I was secured from enslavement by the terrors of
   <a href="Notes/n34425.html" target="bottom">De Quincey</a>’s suffering.  I
   felt assured that he had not unmasked the half of it, since his exquisite
   sense of the refined and the appropriate in all communion with the public,
   showing itself in a thousand places throughout his works, had evidently
   withheld him, in his confessions, from giving to the painful
   <a href="Notes/n81464.html" target="bottom">intaglio</a>
   that deep stroke of the graver which he thought that good taste would not
   permit, even under sanction of truth.</p>
  <p>
   Again, a consideration of more narrow prejudice withheld me — the
   impossibility, if I should use opium, of concealing the fact from my
   associates, some of whom were physicians, and hardly any of them so 
   unobserving as not to be attracted curiously to the peculiarities of the
   opium eye, complexion, and manner.</p>
  <p>
   At this time the reputation of being an opium-eater was one very little 
   desirable in the community which included me, had its further abominable 
   consequences been recklessly put aside.  It was impossible for any one 
   known to have used the drug to make any intellectual effort whatever,
   speech, published article, or brilliant conversation, without being hailed
   satirically as
   <a href="Notes/n66469.html" target="bottom">Coleridge</a>
   <i>le petit</i>, or
   <a href="Notes/n87441.html" target="bottom">De Quincey in the second edition</a>.
   That this was not altogether a morbid condition of public sentiment in the
   microcosm where I dwelt, may be inferred from a fact which, occurring a few
   months before I entered it, had no doubt acted to tinge general opinion.</p>
  <p>
   A certain person, in reading “The Confessions,” had gathered from them (it
   would be hard to say how, since their author every where expresses the
   opium state as one whose serenity is repulsive to all action for the time
   being) that he should be able to excel De Quincey upon his own field if he
   wrote while at the height of the effect.  Setting apart one evening for the
   English opium-eater’s literary discomfiture, he drank his
   <a href="Notes/n32360.html" target="bottom">laudanum</a>,
   and locked himself into his room alone with the awful presence of
   <a href="Notes/n77153.html" target="bottom">a quire of foolscap</a>.
   On the following morning, his friends, knocking at the door repeatedly,
   received no answer, and, fearful of some accident, broke in the lock.  Lo!
   our De Quincey
   <a href="Notes/n07405.html" target="bottom"><i>in petto</i></a>
   was seated in his chair, with pen in hand, and his forehead resting on a
   blank mass of paper, in all the <em>abandon</em> of innocent repose!</p>
  <p>
   After the final abandonment of hasheesh, however, at times, when distress 
   had reduced me to the willingness to test any relief save that of return, I
   once or twice tried the effect of opium.  It was invariably bad, not
   operating, as a renewal of the hasheesh indulgence would have done, to lift
   me into the former plane of pleasurable activity and interest in things
   about me, but singularly combining with whatever of the hasheesh force
   might be remaining in my system to cover me once more with the pall which
   made the worst parts of the old life so painful.  Insane faces glared at
   me; dire voices of prophecy spoke to me even when wide awake; I was filled
   with foreboding of some impending wrathful visitation, and learned to my
   sorrow that I was only exchanging one bitter cup for another.  As the
   opium-influence never approximated the authority of a fascination over me,
   <a href="Notes/n42802.html" target="bottom">I willingly and finally abjured it</a>
   as an impossible relief.</p>
  <p>
   It was some time after this that my constitution, broken down by hard work,
   which, corporeally, to use an intensely idiomatic term, was much more
   “cruel on me” than hasheesh had been at its most nerve-racking stages, 
   demanded not only rest, but something immediately tonic.  The former was 
   easily attained by closing my connection with the educational
   <a href="Notes/n55744.html" target="bottom">“Knight of the Rueful Countenance”</a>
   — a connection which all the while had not been chemical, like that of an
   acid with a base, but mechanical, like that of a force with a lever.  The
   latter (the tonic) was to be found ultimately in exercise; but, for the
   sake of more instantaneous relief from debility, at the advice of a
   physician, I had recourse to spirits.  A very short trial of their effect
   having convinced me that their stimulus was as dangerous as opium, I
   abandoned this also as a means of relief.  The experiment made with it
   renewed, sometimes for two days together, the clarity, though not the
   exquisite beauty of the hasheesh visionary state, and repeated, in due
   succession, its ideal sufferings of night and daylight.</p>
  <p>
   Thus taught that every possible stimulus of any power must invariably act 
   as auxiliary to the partially routed forces of my foe, I called in no more 
   treacherous helps from without, but went single-handed to the fight, armed 
   only with patience and friendly sympathies.</p>
  <p>
   Since learning this lesson, the progress into recovery has been by slow 
   degrees, yet a progress after all.  Ever and anon a return of the former 
   suffering has made it necessary to spend half the night in walking; but the 
   sense that every step forward was also a step, however infinitesimal,
   upward, is a greater relief than the possibility of once more journeying
   through the rosiest realms of the former hasheesh happiness.  At least for
   the present — as a proviso to the proposition let this be added — for he
   who has once looked upon great glories can not but hope to behold them
   again, when nature is freed from all the grossness which makes them painful
   in the present state, and they shall come to him, not through walls which
   they must melt to make a passage-way, but like the sunlight, which, falling
   joyously and harmlessly, bathes the forehead of the little child asleep.</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2> NOTES ON THE WAY UPWARD.  </h2>
  <p>
   It is the author of
   <a href="Notes/n59032.html" target="bottom">“The Golden Dagon,”</a>
   one of our most original and interesting American books of travel, who
   gives to
   <a href="Notes/n51914.html" target="bottom">Boodh</a>,
   as the deity of eternal absorption, the most appropriate title with which
   he has ever, to my knowledge, been glorified.  He calls him “The Stagnant
   Calm.”  As I read it, such peculiar relevancy did this title seem to hold
   to one part of my own experience, that, but for occasional twinges of
   remaining humanity, remembered as having afflicted me about that time, I
   should have yielded to the conviction that I had myself then been an
   incarnation of Boodh.  Hitherto my narrative has been of spell and
   counter-spell; of ecstasies bought on this side of
   <a href="Notes/n89183.html" target="bottom">Acheron</a>,
   where the market was low, and paid for on the other side, where the rate of
   exchange is diabolic; of the checkered days of indulgence, and the one
   starless night of abandonment.  It was during this latter period that the
   Boodhist state occurred.  For many a month before I had been bathed in the
   springs of a fiery activity.  I had lived in ether.  Every sense had been
   worked at its highest power, the sense of the body, and the unspeakably
   more energetic sense of the imagination.</p>
  <p>
   Now the exalting agency was removed.  I have said how I suffered, 
   affirmatively, from its lack in preternatural nightmares, in disgust at
   what seemed to me the lifeless forms of the outer world, in countless modes
   of pain and weariness, whose detail would be only less disagreeable to my
   reader than originally grievous to me.  Far be it from me to recount these
   things again; indeed, for the past I have sometimes feared that I owed an
   apology, and might be expected to say, with him who had reduced courtliness
   to a science,
   <a href="Notes/n63086.html" target="bottom">“Pardon me, gentlemen, that I am so long in dying.”</a></p>
  <p>
   But, negatively, as the months of trial went on, I came into a state which,
   had it been pain, would have made me fear less for myself.  Gradually,
   after having for a long time known what it was to say, “Now I am perfectly 
   wretched,” occurred seasons whose intervals constantly lessened when I
   said, “Now I am totally null.”  It was not happiness any more than the
   rolling of a ball is sustained motion; like it, I went on mechanically by
   the not utterly extinct momentum of a removed force.</p>
  <p>
   This force, too, was an hourly retarded one.  There was constantly less and 
   less hope, less volition, less interest, and the only offset to this
   negation was the opposite negation of disagreeable emotions.  I did not
   despair, because there seemed nothing to despair of.</p>
  <p>
   What should I do?  Often (for this state of non-entity was only occasional
   as yet) I was visited by stern self-reprovings, admonitions to bestir
   myself spiritually as well as mechanically, threatenings of a final
   absorption into utter listlessness unless I resorted to some immediate
   means for quickening the pulses of thought and action.</p>
  <p>
   Good people told me to sleep; Nature was reading me a lesson upon the 
   curative properties of quiet.  Good people, I could not sleep.  I should
   never wake up again.  Moreover, I attended another church of Nature’s,
   where the lesson for the day was,
   <a href="Notes/n58125.html" target="bottom">“He that will not work, neither let him eat;”</a>
   and the margin was illuminated, not with
   <a href="Notes/n79137.html" target="bottom">cherubs like Raphael’s, who have nothing to do except to rest their chins upon their palms</a>,
   but with certain others, sitting in rows upon a bench, diversifying their
   hopeless stare at the topmost pippins of the tree of knowledge by the
   furtive conveyance, from pocket to pocket, of a baser variety of apple,
   smuggled into school for the stay and consolation of the outer man which
   <a href="Notes/n56718.html" target="bottom">perisheth with the using.</a></p>
  <p>
   This being the exact state of things until I left behind me, with my
   fulfilled responsibilities, that portentous and uncomfortable ghost, in
   whom my previous relations had forced me to behold Duty most eccentrically
   making herself incarnate, there were strong reasons for activity, besides
   its necessity as an energy of existence.  In dissolving my connection with
   the portent, the latter reason still remained, and the question was how to
   satisfy it.</p>
  <p>
   There was no further possibility of seeking activity in a research through 
   supernatural passages.  Stimulus had been abjured; the accumulation of 
   mental facts, to serve as food for wonder, under its influence, was
   finished.  Reason, Right, Well, all asserted this.  There remained for me
   but one expedient.</p>
  <p>
   This was to take the facts already secured, and discover, if possible,
   their meaning, their relations to each other; to crystallize them around
   the axis of some hypothesis, and determine what they taught of the
   operations of their source, the mind.</p>
  <p>
   It was in this way that I kept up the vital heat of thought for months, and 
   battled against an all-benumbing lethargy.  The results of this practice I
   now go on to give, without any pretension to group them into a system; not
   only lack of time, but of a sufficiently broad basis of experiment having
   prevented that.  If I shall seem to have fixed the comparative positions of
   even a few outposts of a strange and rarely-visited realm, I shall think
   myself happy.  To travel farther into the interior, even for the sake of
   science, would have required a heroism wearing the guise, as looked at in
   different directions, of the martyr or the suicide.  Of the first of these
   titles I did not hold myself worthy, nor of the last desirous.</p>
  <p>
   How far hasheesh throws light upon the most interior of the mental
   <a href="Notes/n04904.html" target="bottom">arcana</a>
   is a question which will be dogmatically decided in two diametrically
   opposite ways.  The man who believes in nothing which does not, in some
   way, become tangent to his bodily organs will instinctively withdraw
   himself into the fortress of what he supposes to be antique common sense,
   and cry “madman!” from within.  He will reject all of experience under
   stimulus, and the facts which it has professedly evolved as truth, with the
   final and unanswerable verdict of insanity.</p>
  <p>
   There is another class of men which has its type in him who, while 
   acknowledging the corporeal senses as very important in the present 
   nutriment and muniment of our being, is convinced that they give him 
   appearances alone; not things as they are in their essence and their law, 
   classified harmoniously with reference to their source, but only as they
   affect him through the different
   <a href="Notes/n58680.html" target="bottom">adits</a>
   of the body.  This man will be prone
   to believe that Mind, in its prerogative of the only self-conscious being
   in the universe, has the right and the capacity to turn inward to itself
   for an answer to the puzzling enigmas of the world.  Mind, infinite Mind,
   to be sure, created them and must have known their law; as an inference,
   Mind, though finite, may still interrogate its own phenomena for the
   reasons of outer existences which, however grand, are far less majestic
   than itself, and may obtain a
   <a href="Notes/n97403.html" target="bottom">clew</a>
   proportionally perfect.</p>
  <p>
   Arguing thus, the man, albeit a visionary, will recognize the possibility
   of discovering from mind, in some of its extraordinarily awakened states, a
   truth, or a collection of truths, which do not become manifest in his
   every-day condition.  From this man, a few such pages as these may hope for
   a candid reading, if not for total assent.</p>
  <p>
   Nor am I anxious to repel the charge of insanity which may be brought 
   against the facts evolved by a hasheesh delirium.  Indeed, the exaltation,
   in this narrative, has been repeatedly called an insanity.  I only wish to
   be understood as believing that into some subjects the insane man can look 
   farther than the sane.  Let not idiocy here be confounded with insanity.
   The former is the extinction of all faculties; the latter, the
   extraordinary development of one faculty or a group of faculties, while the
   others lie comparatively dormant.</p>
  <p>
   In the same way, therefore, that the characteristics of the plant are
   sought, not in the microscopic filaments and tissues of the germ (although
   they truly exist there), but in the expanded individual of the species, we
   may, more legitimately and with much better hope of success, search out the
   law of a given mental organ in its unusually than its usually developed
   state.</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2> Labyrinths and Guiding Threads.  </h2>
  <p>
   Gentle reader — not to make this one of my speculations more labyrinthine
   than nature, for I hate unnatural mysteries — I will not, after the manner
   of an oracle, leave my title undefined until the sequel, but will here tell
   thee that the “labyrinths” are our bodily senses through which the outer
   world wanders in to commune with the soul.  For a little while let us
   wander in together after the manner of the world, and if the
   <a href="Notes/n97403.html" target="bottom">clew</a>
   of my speculation bring us not to the
   <a href="Notes/n67468.html" target="bottom">penetralia</a>
   as surely as that of
   <a href="Notes/n54992.html" target="bottom">Ariadne</a>,
   we may at least promise ourselves a safe-conduct out again.  Let us try to
   discover the kind of communion which the world and the soul are holding
   together, and the manner in which they hold it.</p>
  <p>
   Long before I had known hasheesh, and walked its weird uplands in pursuit
   of the secrets of mind, a revelation flashed upon me which, by its powers
   of amazement and perplexity, made the time and place of its occurrence
   forever memorial within me.  It was a revelation in the same way that
   lightning is a revelation, clear in itself, yet showing hitherto unknown
   hills of unbroken midnight in the distance.  While yet a mere boy, I was
   standing one afternoon by the side of two thinkers who talked metaphysics
   without taking me into their counsels, for they had no thought of my
   busying myself with any thing but the outside of nature as I met her
   laughing in my rambles.</p>
  <p>
   “Yes, it is beyond dispute that our senses give us only appearances and not
   things — certain qualities of the essence, not the essence out of which
   they rise.”</p>
  <p>
   In these words there was nothing to frighten a mind of ordinarily
   reflective habits; no barricade of “subjective” and “objective,” or any 
   thing else technical which I had not yet learned to scale.  I was smitten 
   with a sudden interest; I did not perfectly appreciate the meaning of the
   sentence, but wandered to a little distance to sit down and think it over
   till I had made it mine.  There was a meaning there which held out the
   strongest fascinations to discovery.</p>
  <p>
   “Our senses give us only appearances, qualities, and not things.”  Perhaps,
   thought I, this is only a sophism hurled down as a sort of challenge for
   argument.  These metaphysicians love to argue.</p>
  <p>
   Of course, I did not have to look far for a test.  I was leaning against a
   tree, and Sense, in the support given me by its trunk, seemed to be
   triumphantly asserting her acquaintance with things — stanch and stout
   things at that.</p>
  <p>
   But hold!  I said to myself; what do I find out in leaning here, which
   makes me think that I have found a thing?  Why, resistance, hardness, to be
   sure.  And it is a fact, these are qualities only.  But this is nothing but
   feeling; let me try the senses of smell and taste.  By applying nose and
   tongue to the tree, I perceived a fresh woody savor — quality still!  I
   put my ear to the tree and struck it: still nothing but quality resulted,
   the capability to beget sound.  I began to be alarmed for the dignity of
   the Sense, as I saw her chance of proving herself worthy of my past
   consideration narrowed down to one single organ — the eye.  Alas for her!
   Quality still — a brown tint, a faculty of transmitting certain rays of
   light, and absorbing others.  It seems strange now, but it is true that,
   with my knife, I began blazing the side of the tree, with a sort of fond
   flattery of the Sense that, though the qualities lay in the bark, “the
   thing” was to be detected lurking underneath.  In a moment, however, I
   laughed perplexedly, realizing that I could make the matter no better if I
   hacked the tree through.</p>
  <p>
   Here ended my first lesson upon the domain of the senses.  I know that this
   incident in itself can claim no such interest as to make it part of an
   experience which one man, without obtrusiveness, may press upon another’s
   ear; but I have related it, believing that it may recall to some reader
   here and there the circumstances under which he made the same discovery.
   Still further, I mention it, since it may be a sort of common ground of
   sympathy between author and reader, upon which will be better understood
   something which I wish to say upon the philosophic sufferings of a great
   mind which it is our duty to appreciate as well as (and indeed in order to)
   pity.</p>
  <p>
   <a href="Notes/n58262.html" target="bottom">David Hume</a>, after having
   been fêted, buried, and reviewed, has been
   quietly laid upon the shelf by many serious men of the present century, in
   that especial niche devoted to “celebrated infidels.”  According to our
   different acceptance of the term, this verdict will be just or unjust.  If
   just, a careful and discriminating generation ought to manifest their
   coincidence with it by permitting him to lie under the index of obloquy.
   If unjust, the sentence will, sooner or later, infallibly be reversed, and
   whatever light, however slight a pencil any man possesses for the
   illustration of the matter, is due no less to truth than to the shade of a
   philosopher.</p>
  <p>
   Infidelity properly classifies itself under two divisions — infidelity of
   the heart and infidelity of the intellect.  The first of these is a
   malignant displeasure at truth for the obligations which it imposes upon
   life.  It begins in a powerfully-felt repulsion between righteousness and
   the selfish will; it sometimes goes avowedly no farther, but leaves a man
   unjust, licentious, and in all respects, where the prudence of selfishness
   does not itself curb him, totally iniquitous.</p>
  <p>
   In the case, however, of those who have carried on the offensive warfare of
   infidelity, one step farther has been taken, an utter and public rejection,
   namely, of the claims of truth upon self-interest.  With this step has been
   conferred the degree, if I may so speak, of Grand Master of the Order of
   Heart Infidelity.  It is not necessary that the man thus advanced should be
   pre-eminent, even above believers, in the prodigal gratification of passion
   and interest; temperament, society, a multiplicity of circumstances may
   serve as steering oars to his course, but circumstances only will direct
   him.  The impelling force to any imaginable excess is present with him, and
   the certain compass of a felt obligation is gone.  According to
   circumstances, he will go large before the wind with the graceful
   <a href="Notes/n77527.html" target="bottom">curvetings of a Bolingbroke</a>,
   or
   <a href="Notes/n95541.html" target="bottom">stagger in a drunken sea like Paine</a>.</p>
  <p>
   The infidelity of the intellect is an entirely different thing.  It arises, 
   not from a hatred, but from an incorrect apprehension of truth.</p>
  <p>
   When we remember how fundamental a part of human nature it is to
   systematize the dicta both of the written and the unwritten revelations, to
   build up the fragmentary formulas which express the manifold relations of
   our being into something like an orderly edifice, we must wonder, not so
   much that error infallibly vitiates to an extent more or less fatal some
   part of the workmanship, as that any structure so far resists gravity as
   not to tumble down.  Not that this imperfection is to be ascribed to the
   habit of systematizing, but to the fact that it is human nature which
   systematizes — human nature, which never in any one age sweeps all truth 
   in a comprehensive view and realizes at once the tendencies of opinions,
   but of necessity looks at half truths through a distorting medium, and sees
   only the present result of speculations.  A corner-stone laid awry, some
   premise whose falsity is unnoticed because it has the sanction of antique
   opinion, may render the whole superstructure out of line and unstable,
   although it be reared by the most cautious workmen with unsparing scrutiny
   of square and plummet.  In a former century, while men were contented
   merely with the foundation walls of a system, it mattered little whether
   every block was laid with perfect accuracy; there was as yet no edifice to
   be affected in its permanency by the error of the ground-work.  But when, 
   in the course of time,
   <a href="Notes/n20611.html" target="bottom">“other men builded thereon,”</a>
   accepting it with perfect faith as the careful structure of a master whose
   name was spoken reverently among men, what wonder that they pointed
   afterward to the marks of considerateness and caution with which they had
   built up their secondary walls of inference into a philosophy, as a proof
   that they must necessarily be stable and faultless, however much some of
   their compeers doubted it, though refusing to acknowledge any fault in the
   foundation?</p>
  <p>
   The infidels of intellect have as often resulted from arguing logically
   upon some falsehood, hitherto universally accepted as a truism, as from any
   distortion of real truths of sophistical deductions from good grounds.
   That, if Hume was an infidel, he became one thus, we think it easy to
   show.  Almost as easy is it to prove that, properly speaking, he was not an
   infidel at all.</p>
  <p>
   As a central point for the consideration of Hume’s infidelity, let us take
   the year 1746, the year in which he stood candidate for the Edinburgh chair
   of Moral Philosophy, and by the vote of the authorities (no doubt with the
   most perfect propriety) was defeated on account of his views of religion.
   Against the action which excluded him from a professorship so rigorously
   demanding an incumbent of Spartan principles upon the subject which was to
   be his speciality, certainly no thinking man can have aught to say.  The
   fact of the exclusion is mentioned merely for the sake of determining some
   date when his bias was generally recognized among the people, who had
   treated with such neglect his “Treatise on Human Nature,” published nine
   years before.  In 1746, then, he had reaped the title of infidel.</p>
  <p>
   For at least half a century previous, the speculative mind of the greater
   part of Europe (dynamically as well as numerically greater) had been under
   the dominion of
   <a href="Notes/n45396.html" target="bottom">John Locke</a>,
   whose “Essay upon the Human Understanding” had been brought to light in
   1690.  It is perhaps rather an insincere compliment to speak of any mind as
   “speculative” which expatiated merely within his prescribed area.  The
   system which bore his name is too well known to ask a statement, especially
   within these limits.  Its parent he could hardly be called; certainly not
   with any more justice than we could ascribe to the man who casually remarks
   that it is a cloudy day the parentage of that meteorological phenomenon.
   His system consists mainly in the discovery that people generally get such
   and such ideas about their thinking faculty; that the said people have
   pretty nearly hit the nail on the head, and that he is glad to tell them
   so; all authenticated by John Locke,
   <a href="Notes/n13029.html" target="bottom">his mark</a>.
   The majority of mankind
   attend to the knowledge secured through their bodily organs more closely
   than to any other; they elaborate truth by thinking upon this knowledge;
   and thus all truth comes to us through the organs, modified to a greater or
   less extent by reflection.  In fine, sense, and reflection on its data, the
   sources of all knowledge, form the governing principle, the
   <a href="Notes/n23174.html" target="bottom">“articulum stantis aut cadentis ecclesiæ”</a>
   of the Lockian philosophy.</p>
  <p>
   Into this philosophy Hume, like all the other contemporary minds of his
   nation, was born as regularly as into the monarchical form of government.
   It was the nursery of his childhood and the school of his youth; his mind,
   when it wanted exercise, must run out and play in John Locke’s small back
   yard, or not stretch its limbs at all.</p>
  <p>
   Now there came a time when David Hume arrived at the very same point of
   speculation which I have previously mentioned as reached, on my
   supposition, by most of us who think.  Let us see how he reasoned.  Suppose
   him in soliloquy:</p>
  <p>
   “I find that my senses give me nothing but the phenomena of things — tell
   me merely how objects act upon me.  My eye acquaints me with color and
   outline; my ear with vibrations of diverse intensities; and so on with all
   the rest of the organs.  All give qualities of things, operations which
   things have a capability to perform on me, appearances of things, but never
   <em>things</em> themselves.  How do I know that they do not?  By reflection,
   certainly; reflection on the data afforded by sense.  But why do we all
   believe, and act upon the belief, that we see, hear, feel, smell, and taste
   <em>things?</em>  It must no doubt be sense that tells us so; that is the
   only conjoint source of knowledge with reflection.  Then I have within me,
   and so has every one else, two exactly opposite verdicts.  I <em>do</em> know
   <em>things</em>, and I <em>do not</em> know them.  Now which is the lie?”</p>
  <p>
   Hume did not decide.  He did not pretend to stand arbiter between these two
   conflicting juries, which Locke fifty years before had impanneled to settle
   infallibly, and without appeal, all the questions of human science.  He
   only hung in perfect equipoise between the reality and the nonentity of all
   being, himself necessarily included.  He became, as a strictly logical
   consequence of that teaching which he had drunk with his mother’s milk, and
   which he would have rejected as much in peril of being called an unnatural
   son by all his contemporaries,
   <a href="Notes/n90279.html" target="bottom">a Pyrrhonist</a>,
   a universal doubter.  And who, in the name of all candor, was the parent of
   his Pyrrhonism?  Who but John Locke, who, while a believer himself, because
   he did not bowl far enough in his own direction, had nevertheless opened up
   an easy track to the most comprehensive system of skepticism in the
   universe.</p>
  <p>
   There may be those who will think that we have made out no better case for
   Hume by proving him a skeptic than an infidel.  What difference exists,
   they ask, between doubting and disbelieving?  Every possible difference.
   Belief and unbelief are often wrongly taken as antipodes merely on account
   of their antagonistic sound, and doubting is often confounded with the
   latter.  Unbelief is, in fact, the same mental act as belief, directed by
   evidence or passion to a different set of statements.  Doubt recognizes an
   equiponderance of evidence, or a total lack of evidence on both sides.  Now
   the impulses of hate, pride, and a thousand others may bear a man’s belief
   one way or another, and so vitiate the sincerity of a judgment which ought
   to found itself calmly on proof.  Doubt, where it is real, can never be
   thus produced by impulse.  To sit upon the exact centre of the beam, it
   must be calm.  Therefore, so far as any man is a sincere skeptic, so far is
   he proved guiltless of the charge of hostility to either side.</p>
  <p>
   I do not assert this perfect calm for Hume.  In the present imperfect
   condition of humanity we act so universally from intricately mixed motives,
   that it would not be safe to assert a purely ideal sincerity for any one.
   Doubtless Hume was influenced in the after maintenance of his Pyrrhonist
   principles by many of those partisan considerations which weigh with us
   all.  But in the first
   <a href="Notes/n03464.html" target="bottom">susception</a>
   of his doubt, acting, as he did, upon the
   every-where acknowledged basis that Locke was right, no man could have been
   more logical, more calmly, philosophically sincere.  Ratiocination, and not
   hostility to religion, was the original cause of his skepticism.</p>
  <p>
   It is particularly unfortunate for a man when he is thrown into the society
   of those who, by flattering that in him which his better nature feels to be
   a blemish and a disadvantage, if not a crime, lull his pain at its
   existence, and even persuade him to believe that it is his honor.  We have
   to observe an exemplification of such misfortune in Hume, who, but for
   being lauded and fêted as the
   <a href="Notes/n44115.html" target="bottom">Coryphæus</a>
   of infidels, for whom he felt no cordial attraction, might have outlived
   his skepticism through draughts of a better philosophy, or, at least, have
   kept it to himself as his most mournful secret.</p>
  <p>
   Allowing himself to be applauded as the infidel which he was not, he
   fortified within himself the skeptic which he was; but that he never made a
   whole-hearted consecration of himself, as some would misrepresent him, to
   the cause of a malignant and offensive unbelief, is evident from many facts
   in its history; such, for instance was his indignant rebuff of the pert
   wife of
   <a href="Notes/n11587.html" target="bottom">the atheist Mallet</a>,
   who took the liberty of introducing herself to him at a soirée:
   <a href="Notes/n51239.html" target="bottom">“We free-thinkers ought to know
   each other, Mr. Hume.” “I am no free-thinker, madam;”</a> and, turning on
   his heel, he strode angrily away.</p>
  <p>
   There is a letter of his, also, which I only quote from memory, in which he
   exhibits the man he would have been if left alone, declaring that he never
   sat down to a game of chess with a friend, and thus threw off his logical
   panoply, without feeling his doubts vanish and the reality of things
   return.  Yet this very letter has been quoted in evidence of his
   insincerity, because, it is said, he was forced to reason that he might
   support his doubts.  But what if reasoning infallibly sustained them?  Was
   he to trust in Hume playing chess or in Hume reasoning?</p>
  <p>
   By his unnatural conjunction with infidels, he subjected himself to bear
   the obloquy of their praise.  By their praise, an antagonist spirit of
   denunciation was excited in the society of believers.  Denounced, he must
   reply, for the sake of his pride and his partisans.  And thus, from the
   sincerely perplexed doubter, he came to be considered, and in a certain,
   though a far less degree to be, the sneering foe of Christianity.</p>
  <p>
   I have dwelt thus long upon Hume and the circumstances which have tended to
   give him his present reputation, and to set upon the stamp of an odium in
   many respects unjust, because he is an example not less striking than
   painful of the evil which may be wrought for a man by some unnoticed error
   in his mental philosophy.  How easily an error which is the germ of all
   things hurtful may escape the notice of men who accept without examining,
   can be seen from the fact that the good John Locke (for he was good) was
   never advised of the skeptical inference from his doctrine, but died as
   perfectly satisfied with it as he had lived.</p>
  <p>
   Most gratefully do I remember that, at the time of my first discovery of
   the legitimate domain of the senses, I was not left, like many others in
   similar case, and Hume as the representative of them all, to retreat
   hopelessly into a negation of all knowledge.</p>
  <p>
   It is the privilege and the glory of this day that its dominant philosophy is
   <a href="Notes/n76832.html" target="bottom">Transcendental</a>.
   Much as this word, like its kindred visionary, is in the mouth of hawkers
   of
   <a href="Notes/n77981.html" target="bottom">theological small ware</a>
   — much as it has been applied, by a perversion,
   to all systems of error and nonsense — much as it has been branded for a
   stigma upon the forehead of thinkers who would not travel in a go-cart, the
   idea which it represents has been the regeneration of speculative
   philosophy.  The Transcendentalists are, indeed, climbers over, as their
   name signifies, yet not over sound reasoning nor the definite principles of
   truth, but over that ring-fence of knowledge brought in through mere
   physical passages, with which a tyrannous oligarchy of reasoners would
   circumscribe all our wanderings in search of facts and laws.</p>
  <p>
   Older than its oldest historic supporting names, Transcendentalism still
   found champions in the more enfranchised minds of Greece, and from them we
   come
   <a href="Notes/n65973.html" target="bottom">per saltum</a>
   to its German champions of the latter half of the last, and the elapsed
   half of the present century.
   <a href="Notes/n31839.html" target="bottom">Kant</a>,
   awakened, as there is some reason to think, by the very perplexity which
   set boundaries to the mind of Hume, stands forth as the resurrectionist of
   the long-buried idea, and is followed, with more or less nonessential
   departure from his main track, by
   <a href="Notes/n63052.html" target="bottom">Fichte</a>,
   <a href="Notes/n13877.html" target="bottom">Hegel</a>, 
   and
   <a href="Notes/n92677.html" target="bottom">Schelling</a>;
   for, although the first of the trio may be styled a pure idealist, he
   follows Kant pre-eminently in the assertion of far higher grounds of
   knowledge than the sense.  It is complained that these men, and chief of
   all Kant, are unintelligible; that their phraseology is cumbrous and
   obscure.  It is not difficult, however, for any mind in charity with the
   direction of their efforts to see abundant reason why it should be so.</p>
  <p>
   In the first place, while their language (when they did not write in Latin,
   and when they did their German modes of thought still went with them) is
   the most plastic in the world to all the moulds of mind, while it admits of
   endless word-compounding to give roundness or definiteness to ideas, still,
   from this very fact, it tends toward obscurity, for the reason that the
   compounds so lengthen a sentence as to make it very difficult to carry the
   meaning from beginning to end.</p>
  <p>
   In the second place, it is to be remembered that the ideas which these men
   had to communicate were to a great extent new — new even to one who looked
   at them fragmentarily — new particularly in their combinations as a
   system.  They who set them forth were the pioneers of Transcendentalism;
   they had nothing ready to their hand, nothing open or clear; and the first
   entrance into a territory is always of necessity by a rugged path; it is
   for those who enter into their labors, who come in upon the ground which
   they have opened, to attend to grading the causeway.  First the military
   road, after that the turnpike.  As well may we quarrel with
   <a href="Notes/n49181.html" target="bottom">Captain John Smith</a>
   for not laying a railway through the forests of Virginia, as with
   Kant for not smoothing the passage into a philosophy through which he was
   the first traveler.  It was enough for him that he had grappled with great 
   ideas and fixed them; let his successors attend to polishing their
   surface.</p>
  <p>
   Third, it has been put out of sight by the prevalence of a philosophy which
   calls itself that of
   <a href="Notes/n55780.html" target="bottom">common sense</a>,
   but is much worthier of being named that
   of commonplace, that metaphysics is as true and distinct a science as
   chemistry, with its own peculiar and inalienable ideas, and in virtue of
   that prerogative demands, both as necessity and right, symbols to express
   its ideas which shall be its own exclusive property.  Let the phrases of
   distinction, “objective” and “subjective,” be an example.  “Objective” is
   everything which, in the processes of mind, is not myself, but extraneous
   to me; “subjective,” all that is myself and my own individual part of the
   operation.  Now the sense philosophy could have no possible use for any
   such words as these, since it recognizes nothing but a paper distinction
   between a man and his objects for all purposes of perception, all his
   knowledge being gained through sense, and flowing into him as its passive
   receptacle.  So sense philosophy sneers at such technical phraseology as
   pedantic.  But, supposing it capable of requiring some symbols for such
   ideas, it would most likely adopt “outward” and “inward.”  For
   speculations, or rather assertions, so little analytic and accurate as its
   own, these might do well enough; but how inert, how useless, how vague
   would they be where any subtle mental fact was to be definitely expressed.
   We wish to give the idea of the mind as examined by itself.
   Transcendentalists call this treating the mind “objectively.”  Our sense
   men would be compelled to say, treating it “outwardly.”  How definite would
   be the idea conveyed in that!</p>
  <p>
   When we complain of the sailor for speaking of his masts as spars, instead
   of calling them sticks, to meet the comprehension of some land-lubber who
   will not take the pains to learn practical navigation — when the chemist
   is sneered at for saying crucible instead of pot — when, in fine, public
   opinion shall compel all men to talk of the delicacies of their arts in
   street slang or boudoir twaddle, then, and not till then, will it be time
   to deride the science, wherein, more than all others, rigorous exactitude
   of expression is required, for having a peculiar, even though it be not a
   universally intelligible language.  This talk about the pedantry of
   metaphysics is something which the age should be ashamed of as behind it,
   yet even now we occasionally light upon some reviewer who, in strains of
   touching pathos, laments to the public that he finds it impossible to read
   <a href="Notes/n98362.html" target="bottom">Hickok’s Rational Psychology</a>
   to his wife of an evening on account of the doctor’s pedantic technicality,
   which makes him a sealed book even to that gifted woman.</p>
  <p>
   In general, it is safe to lay down this proposition as a rule: first look 
   cursorily over a book upon Mind, to see whether its general character for
   neatness and system proves that its author is neither fool nor sloven; and
   then, reading it through carefully and with candor, you will find that in
   proportion to its technicality is it the repository of new and deeper
   truths.  This, of course, is to be understood of those books on Mind which,
   according to
   <a href="Notes/n34425.html" target="bottom">De Quincey</a>’s
   division in
   <a href="Notes/n71560.html" target="bottom">his critique on Pope</a>,
   belong to the literature of knowledge, and not the literature of power.
   The same habit of mental indolence, which
   is loosening the cords of our American literature — the loving such books
   as read themselves to us while we lie half asleep on a sofa; the greed for 
   dainties which may be swallowed whole, and which tickle at a moment’s
   warning — this habit it is which has deprived of nine tenths of his
   legitimate number of readers such a man, for instance, as Hickok.  Almost
   the only real metaphysician of America, perhaps the greatest now living any
   where, and worthy to be classed with the strongest and deepest thinkers of
   any age or land, he has, in his own country, about as many intelligent and
   appreciative readers as Pythagoras had of esoteric disciples.  There is
   reason to fear that men love better to investigate how muslins, hay-rakes,
   and, above all and inclusive of all, money may be made, than how their own
   minds are constructed.</p>
  <p>
   One might almost be content to leave them and their preference alone, on
   the ground that they are the best judges of the respective value of their
   own several commodities.</p>
  <p>
   Great reason have I to be thankful, again I say, that I was suckled at the
   breast of Transcendentalism.  I am doubtless not without sympathy in others
   when I say that the first moment when it flashed upon me how in the Reason
   might be found the laws and the essences of things, and that we were not
   confined for our knowledge to the mere ungrouped and unsettled appearances
   of the Sense, was like a revelation; it expanded and dignified the soul
   with a sudden access of glories such as no earthly kingship could give.  At
   that moment spirit appeared to me for the first time something more than
   the hopeless bond-slave of matter.  For the sake of experiencing that
   feeling again in its full force of grand joyousness, I would like to
   exchange places with Locke, at the instant of his disembodiment, when he
   found out that he was mistaken.  In having gone astray as a philosopher, he 
   suddenly had all the more glorious surprise as a soul.</p>
  <p>
   There was one question, however, which for a long time troubled me, but to
   which I at length got a satisfactory, although, perhaps, most men may
   disagree with me in the belief that it is a true answer.  This is the
   question, How does the outer world ever become apparent to the spirit?  I
   could see very easily how in the Reason the law conditioning an outer world
   might be found, but how did the appearances themselves become known?  The
   manner of intercourse between matter and matter, between spirit and spirit,
   or between any two individualities of the same kind, was plain enough, or
   at least such an intercourse was reasonable.  But with our views of matter
   and spirit, two existences in their very essence utterly dissimilar, how
   could they ever become tangent?</p>
  <p>
   Take, for instance, such a case as this:  I am hit by a stone.  The thrill
   conveyed along its appropriate nerve runs up the brain, and here we trace
   its ultimate footprint on the material organism.  Yet an infinitesimal
   instant more, and my mind has learned it, is moved to anger, and reasons
   for revenge or remedy.  I could not see the connection by which the fact of
   the blow, however refined by its passage, was prolonged from matter into
   spirit.  The books said that, on reaching the brain, the fact became a
   <a href="Notes/n12638.html" target="bottom">tertium quid</a>,
   a third something, neither matter nor spirit, but so etherealized that the
   mind could read it.  What, however, was that tertium quid?</p>
  <p>
   In the process of time, and by the aid of that ever to be blessed
   Transcendentalism which had helped me out of my earliest perplexity, I came
   to the conclusion that the tertium quid was a humbug, a metaphysical
   <a href="Notes/n33168.html" target="bottom">Mrs. Harris, upon whom the
   responsibility of all things impossible to be done or conceived was laid by
   psychological Mistresses Gamp</a>.
   The answer which satisfied me was this: that there are only two kinds or
   modes of existence in the universe — the one, self-conscious spirit; the
   other, the acts of such spirit.  From these data arose such a theory of the
   universe as the following:</p>
  <p>
   The Supreme Being, as Creator of all things, is ever in activity, according
   to certain eternal and universal laws of right and truth.  Whatever else of
   self-conscious Being exists, came forth originally as an
   <a href="Notes/n57735.html" target="bottom">efflux</a>
   from him,
   but is now in its will, though not for the continuance of its separate
   existence, independent of his direct action.  As spirit, man is capable of
   communion with the supreme spirit.  Since, however, spirit itself is in its
   very essence imperceptible to senses, the communion makes itself
   perceptible by appearances.  These appearances, whose cause we call
   “matter,” are therefore, in reality, but the effects of spirit’s action
   upon spirit.  In no sense, then, does any such thing as
   <em>dead matter</em> exist.  It is God’s thinking felt by us.</p>
  <p>
   If it shall be said that there is no difference between this and Pantheism,
   let me be allowed to show how the two systems differ
   <a href="Notes/n26604.html" target="bottom"><i>toto cœlo</i></a>.
   I do not assert that matter is God.  I say that the actor is God, and the
   effects of his action upon other spirit, which we call matter, are neither
   God, nor in any sense self-conscious.  To make it clear, let my reader
   suppose himself striking a blow.  He here appears as the self-conscious
   actor; yet how great an absurdity would it appear to him to call the blow
   itself after his name, or to attribute self-consciousness to it.  He would
   say, The act of striking is an abstract idea, to which the other idea of
   self-consciousness can not be pertinent.</p>
  <p>
   To carry out the parallel for further illustration, let us suppose this
   blow to fall upon the cheek of a bystander.  The man struck would gain,
   from the effect produced on him, a pretty correct idea of the state of the
   striker’s feeling, notwithstanding he did not suppose that the blow was the
   striker, nor that it thought for itself.</p>
  <p>
   Similarly in kind, let us suppose that the Deity is forever acting out 
   through all the universe the principles of his infinite and righteous mind.
   By the effects of this action he becomes known to his spiritual creatures,
   and in reality manifests the state of his mind toward them.  By such
   action, in its effect upon us known as matter, he attains the only
   incarnation of himself for reciprocal communion which could make him
   known.</p>
  <p>
   I have said that this resolution of the problem of the Universe is the only
   one which ever satisfied me.  The deductions which I made from it served to
   keep my own activity alive through many a day of suffering; and thus from
   it, in its satisfaction and its energizing, I received a double good.  I
   will state some of the deductions.</p>
  <p>
   Let me be permitted, for the sake of consonance with my theory, to speak,
   where accuracy is wanted, of matter, known in this light as the effect of
   the divine action, under the name of Force.  I do not employ it in its mere
   mechanical sense, but as expressive of the manner of communion between two
   spiritual beings, to an extent metaphorically meaning something analogous
   to what in matter would be called the result of impingement.</p>
  <p>
   1.  In our bodily organism is one of the most cogent proofs of the Supreme
   good-will toward us.  By his own act he has insphered us within a force,
   the body, which not only resists many other forces and preserves its own
   integrity, but, what is of much greater importance, modifies our reception
   of knowledge from without, and blunts the acuteness of our action within to
   such an extent that truth does not come to us with a fatal shock, but
   gradually and softened, until we are able to bear it.  Viewed as a
   counteractive force, the body is thus one of the highest proofs of God’s
   benignity, since, left in our present state of spiritual infancy without
   it, no lidless eyeball beneath a noonday sun might be more agonized.  It is
   as much cause for thanksgiving as for aspiration to something clearer, that
   we now
   <a href="Notes/n62298.html" target="bottom">“see through a glass darkly.”</a>
   Let us not repine, for there is a reason in these half opaque and tinged
   panes.  A sun as consuming as he is wondrously glorious is shining just
   outside.</p>
  <p>
   2.  We may here find a further illustration of that which in the previous
   pages has been said of the symbolization, by every existence of the world,
   of some spiritual fact.  The incarnation is as the essence; the universe is
   as it is because God lives as he lives.  He is making himself felt in the
   effects of his communion with us.</p>
  <p>
   A thousand times in the year do we hear it said that every plant is an
   evidence of God’s goodness; yet how much more amply, more nobly is this
   true than men generally suppose!  Whatever of horror or deformity exists in
   the unconscious creation, is but the manifestation of Creative displeasure
   at our wrong; whatever of beauty (and how prodigally it is spread abroad!)
   is a testimony, rich with meaning, of that benevolence which mixes its
   displeasure with pity, and the return of wondrous good for an evil which is
   only less boundless.  The continuance of Niagara, with its wealth of
   ennobling influences, is as speaking a proof to every man of God’s good
   feeling to him as the continuance of his life.  In
   <a href="Notes/n84077.html" target="bottom">the millennium</a>
   to which men are looking forward, how easily conceivable is it that by the
   literal fulfillment of our grandest prophecies and hopes; that an
   unblemished scenery, an illimitable luxuriance of greenness in the fields,
   an inspiration of beauty by every visible thing, may be the exponent of the
   gladness in the Great Heart above us at the restoration into perfectness of
   his filial race.</p>
  <p>
   But our philosophy does not limit us to an analytic gaze upon the earth
   alone.  The firmament, from our eyes onward in all directions forever, is
   full of stars.  Some of these, perhaps all of them, there is reason to
   believe are peopled; but, granting that they roll on in utter loneliness,
   what of that?  They are there, and as they are, because God is acting
   grandly, wisely, and righteously, and that it is all-satisfying to know.
   Even now they teach us lessons nightly, speaking both of Beauty and Truth.
   But what if they may be, also, carrying on their far-off orbits some
   incarnation of an attribute of God, which in our present state, we are not
   sufficiently strong to bear?</p>
  <p>
   It is the characteristic of the written revelation to be comprehensive.
   Doubtless all of God is there in the germ; yet how many a line is drawn
   purposely in deep shadow!  We are not ready for it yet.</p>
  <p>
   The natural revelation, the universe, is in itself as comprehensive; but,
   since we can never see it all at once, to us it must necessarily be 
   fragmentary.  Thus we now have Earth to read from; yet when we are 
   disembodied and purified — when the incarnation through which the Divine 
   is to come to us may with safety be made less gross than its form in the
   present matter, we shall learn through the stars, which have been kept
   waiting for us, sublimer and still sublimer truths of spirit throughout an
   ascending life.</p>
  <p>
   Well may the man who, while his utmost gaze now catches them only as
   gleaming points, yet rejoices in the assurance of their significant
   harmony, break forth,</p>
  <p>
   “O yet uninterrupted symbols, from afar I hail you as the promise of a
   truth which it is for Immortality to drink in!  Beautiful, strange, yet not
   inexplicable; even now are ye beaming links of that chain which binds me to
   Deity; ye shall hereafter draw me close to his presence in a grander
   communion.  Await me brightly while I calmly long for you.”</p>
  <p>
   In the closest circle of earthly fellowship wherein I have known what it is
   for heart to be knit with heart, it has ever been the beautiful custom to
   write the dead, who, though absent, were still one with the living
   brotherhood, under this title,
   <center><a href="Notes/n51428.html" target="bottom">
    “Qui fuerunt, sed nunc ad astra.”
   </a></center>
   How grand a meaning may there be in this!</p>
  <p>
   3.  Upon the ground that all knowledge through sense may be resolved into
   the idea of force, there are some reasons for supposing that this force may
   in itself be simple, and only varied by its approach to the soul through
   the differently modifying organs.  In fine, that sight, hearing, touch,
   taste, and smell may be effects, to speak after the common nomenclature, of
   the same object, or one grand effect divided into several by
   transmission.</p>
  <p>
   An inspection of the analogies of science must convince us that this 
   proposition, if not <i>à priori</i> necessarily true, is, at any
   rate, extremely probable.  The progress of philosophical research is 
   invariably from the complex to the simple.  The myriad phenomena of 
   chemistry are all traceable to the action and reaction in various 
   combinations of a very limited number of elements; these elements are still
   farther resolvable in their composition into still fewer and more ethereal
   bodies.  In the same way, all the mechanical operations are due to
   differing applications of
   <a href="Notes/n45562.html" target="bottom">six motors</a>;
   and these, by still further analysis, arrange themselves under the head of
   physical force.  These are but two instances out of the multitude which
   prove the great law of simplification by research.</p>
  <p>
   In many a field of inquiry the philosopher has reduced the agents effective
   for a given result to two or three; the next step would bring him to the
   all-comprehensive unity; but no, that step can not be taken, for nature
   here so suddenly subtilizes the springs of her activity, that she may float
   just before the face of her
   <a href="Notes/n13680.html" target="bottom">hierophant</a>,
   and laugh invisibly at baffled
   microscope and hypothesis.  Yet enough is known in all departments of
   investigation to prove that the tendency of discovery is invariably from
   the vast periphery of facts inward to one single central law.</p>
  <p>
   Yet let us not leave the theory of the all-comprehensive oneness of sense
   to base its plausibility upon a general analogy.  We are able to 
   particularize.  What reason, then, have we, from known facts, to suppose
   all the senses directly referable to force?  A brief analysis will discover
   most of the evidence we have.</p>
  <p>
   And, 1st. Touch, simply considered as the organ for determining the
   hardness, weight, and form of bodies.  The two former will be seen to be
   directly resolvable into force,
   <a href="Notes/n45240.html" target="bottom">viz.</a>,
   the force of resistance, in the one
   case particularized as cohesion, in the other as gravitation.  The 
   distinction of form may be also comprehended as an idea of force by the
   following statement.  I move my hand in all directions in the plane of the
   horizon, and, finding it every where resisted <em>by an equal force</em> from
   below, say, “This is a flat surface.”</p>
  <p>
   The resistance, in another instance, occurs in a different direction, and I
   express this fact by saying sphere, cone, ellipsoid, etc., as the case may
   be.</p>
  <p>
   2d. Sight.  It is, no doubt, well known to many of my readers that, in
   modern times,
   <a href="Notes/n16414.html" target="bottom">two theories</a>
   have obtained upon the action of light, or, more properly, its origination.
   Both of them arose or were resuscitated from antiquity in the seventeenth
   century, but that which bears the name of
   <a href="Notes/n79980.html" target="bottom">Huygens</a>
   is by a few years the earlier.  This philosopher held that all luminous
   bodies are in a state of almost infinitely rapid, though infinitesimally
   small vibration; that this vibration propagates itself in all directions
   with an undulatory motion through
   <a href="Notes/n76767.html" target="bottom">an exceedingly subtle and elastic fluid, known as ether, which fills all space</a>;
   that these undulations, impinging against any material body, bound back,
   or, in usual parlance, are reflected to the eye, and, striking upon the
   retina, give through the optic nerve, of which it is an expansion, the
   sensation of sight.</p>
  <p>
   The second theory is that of
   <a href="Notes/n45565.html" target="bottom">Newton</a>,
   who supposed that luminous bodies are continually giving off infinitesimal
   radiant particles, which, through the ethereal medium, impinge upon the eye
   in the same manner and with the same effect as the light-waves of Huygens’
   theory.</p>
  <p>
   The former hypothesis (viz.,
   Huygens’) is that at this day entertained by the majority of
   <a href="Notes/n42956.html" target="bottom">savans</a>,
   but the discovered laws of optics accord
   <a href="Notes/n99102.html" target="bottom">equally well with either</a>.
   No further dissertation is necessary to show that in either case the
   conception of sight is resolvable into the idea of a perceived
   <em>force</em>.</p>
  <p>
   3d. Hearing.  Upon this sense there is certainly no need of enlarging, it
   being universally known that sound is the offspring of vibration, and
   therefore a <em>force</em>, subject in its transmission, reflection, etc.,
   to laws precisely analogous to those of light, modified merely by the nature
   of the medium, viz., air or grosser bodies, through which it travels, in
   contradistinction to the infinitely subtle ether which propagates light.
   There is, however, one analogy upon which we may dwell for a short time,
   which would seem greatly to strengthen the general theory that all
   sensations are, in their essential agency, one.</p>
  <p>
   The relationship between light and sound does not terminate in the fact, of
   itself sufficiently striking, that they both obey similar conditions of
   transmission and reflection.  True, they each pass to the human organ, not
   by one unbroken leap, but by a series of waves.  Literally, lightning no
   more <em>darts</em> upon the eye than the faintest beam of dawn; thunder
   comes undulating to the ear as truly as the softest sigh; and the light
   cast upon us from a mirror is only an echo through ether instead of
   air.</p>
  <p>
   But there is a far more intricate affiliation between them.  In the very
   possibilities of their existence they are the same.  Every ray of light can
   be comprehended within the range of seven radical colors and the
   combinations of them.
   <a href="Notes/n16482.html" target="bottom">This law of but seven possible colors is not an accident</a>,
   but a primeval and necessary accompaniment of the manner of transmission.</p>
  <p>
   Every possible sound likewise lies between the two termini of a gamut whose
   number of root sounds is seven, and
   <a href="Notes/n53449.html" target="bottom">this septenary law of sound</a>
   is as necessary as that of light.</p>
  <p>
   The universality with which these laws are practically known by means of
   the prism and the octave, take off, as is the case in so many other
   habitual mysteries, the edge of our legitimate wonder.  Yet when, for a
   moment, we reflect calmly upon the fact that we may analyze light of any
   possible kind with the most rigid scrutiny without adding a single
   principal color to a fixed range of seven; that we may utter any
   conceivable sound without escaping from the same mystic boundaries; that in
   both cases our only changes must be rung by reduplication or blending
   within those adamantine gamut walls; when we reflect, I say, on these two
   truths, each fit food in itself for wonder, and find that in fact they are
   but one truth, and that a characteristic of sensations which we have always
   treated as essentially different, we shall have reason to confess, with
   amazement, a far more intimate union between sight and hearing than any of
   outer coincidence.  Indeed, excepting the before-mentioned difference,
   which their several media of travel impress upon them,
   <a href="Notes/n46293.html" target="bottom">philosophy can not find a mark of distinction between sight and sound</a>.</p>
  <p>
   How strong a claim to interior oneness this law of seven bestows can be
   fully felt only by realizing how essential a law it is.  So essential is it
   that probably, in the whole universe, it may be impossible to find a
   complete range of any operations which does not, in its internal nature,
   submit to it.  I say this perfectly aware that there are insuperable
   obstacles, while we enjoy no more than our present development of mind, to
   proving this to a logical certainty.  Yet the vast probability which
   appears to me in the proposition rests upon one fact which I have never
   seen noticed in connection with these senses.  Doubtless it has been
   noticed, however, for from time immemorial the significancy of the number
   seven has employed the researches of philosophers and theologians.  The
   fact is this:  In the Divine philosophy of Creation, which is, at the same
   time, the most reverend also for age, there is a stress laid upon the
   importance of this number as exponent of some law of completion, of
   perfectness, which, unless it be granted deeply significant, can be treated
   upon no middle ground between that and a puerility partaking of imposture.
   <a href="Notes/n11788.html" target="bottom">The <em>seventh</em> day</a>
   as the one whose advent expressly witnessed the completion of the Kosmos
   (<a href="Notes/n09933.html" target="bottom">whatever of length we may give to the days of the creation</a>);
   the impress of some secret import upon <em>seven</em>, by countless
   ceremonial symbols, inculcated to
   <a href="Notes/n81005.html" target="bottom">that people who, during the whole period of the Theocracy, held more direct communion with the Divine source of all Truth than any nation before or since</a>;
   the constant recurrence, in
   <a href="Notes/n75505.html" target="bottom">the Word</a>,
   of
   <a href="Notes/n98505.html" target="bottom">prophetic uses of the number</a>,
   and such a phrase as this:
   <a href="Notes/n14041.html" target="bottom">“Wisdom hath builded her house; she hath hewn out her <em>seven</em> pillars:”</a>
   all these seem to indicate, beyond the possibility, in my mind at least, of
   conceiving the contrary possible, that this number is a fundamental law of
   perfectness in the Universe.</p>
  <p>
   As such, therefore, and comprehending under its rule the two senses of
   sight and hearing, it proves a oneness in their essential conditions which
   seems irrefutable.  In some of the more intensely awakened hasheesh states,
   there was a great light thrown upon this subject, but, with many other
   views gained like it, through symbolization, on my return to the natural
   state it passed away from my mind forever.</p>
  <p>
   4. Smell.  Within the last ten years an attempt has been made by some
   Frenchman of speculative mind, whose name I forget, to determine if this
   sense a septenary gamut also, in which the only two tones that have not
   escaped me, to the best of my knowledge, were citron and rose.  If the
   natural existence of such a gamut could be accurately determined, it would
   be a great auxiliary, certainly, to our argument; but I fear that our
   knowledge of the catalogue and relations of all possible odors is so very
   imperfect as to make the research only
   <a href="Notes/n01634.html" target="bottom">a fanciful recreation</a>.
   From the great variety of the objects, and the lack of scientific delicacy
   of the sense of smell, it is a very difficult one to deal with.  He who
   investigates it through its own instrumentality, which, of course, is the
   only possible method for an inductive science, is very much at the
   disadvantage of him who should try to dissect an animalcule with his finger
   nail.</p>
  <p>
   Yet there is, even with such obstacles in the way, a possibility of proving
   odor ultimately resolvable into that <em>force</em> which we have discovered
   as the common idea of the preceding senses.  I have held the opinion,
   whether original with me or not I can not say, that odor, like light and
   sound, may be propagated by undulations; if not as the only mode, at least
   as one of two modes, the other of which is immediate chemical action upon
   the organ.  As an argument in favor of this, I would instance the grain of
   musk, which, without losing weight at all appreciably, will for years
   render the room in which it is kept intolerable to its enemies.</p>
  <p>
   But, granting that the chemical action is its only one, this fact, so far
   from precluding the idea of <em>force</em> which we seek to make general,
   only illustrates it.  The very chemical action is itself a force.  As an
   example, notice the effect of some such odorous agent as makes its effect
   particularly marked; let us say hellebore, which, when smelled, causes
   <a href="Notes/n98149.html" target="bottom">odic action</a>
   of the nerve, in some cases only less powerful than that appropriate
   to galvanism.  The flower of the catalpa produces a similar effect upon
   myself, sufficiently severe to cause very troublesome bleeding; and I know
   several persons affected in like manner by the carnation pink and
   eglantine.</p>
  <p>
   5. Taste.  The theory supported by some physicists upon the operation of
   this very little scientifically understood sense is something such as
   this.  The tongue, upon a foundation of muscular fibre, carries a nervous
   membrane, not wholly smooth even in the most delicate species, but
   bristling, more or less compactly, with highly sensitive minute nervous
   tufts, known to physiology under the name of “papillæ,” literally,
   “little teats,” from their peculiar form.  Sapid substances being dissolved
   by the saliva, and thus resolved into their ultimate particles, in the form
   of these particles penetrate the papillæ.  By something analogous to
   an exquisitely-refined sense of touch, these papillæ detect the
   peculiar form characteristic of every ultimate particle of the given sapid
   substance, and thus define it as a certain taste.</p>
  <p>
   If this be the correct explanation of the taste-phenomena, they resolve
   themselves into a perceived force of form, and thus come within our law.
   But I imagine that the operation is still more subtle; and that in every
   substance possessing sapidity, there is, producing the sensation, a force
   by itself, possessing as true an individuality as the electric, and in each
   case bearing a specific characteristic which gives it its peculiar taste.
   Perhaps it may be akin to the galvanic fluid.  This seems to be suggested
   by the result of an experiment very easily made, viz., placing a circle of
   zinc upon one side of the tongue and of copper on the other, when the
   curious possibility will be manifest of actually “tasting galvanism.”</p>
  <p>
   6. Feeling.  I have made this distinction between feeling and touch for the
   reason that, although their sensations may be propagated along the same
   sets of nerves, the strongly-marked difference in nature between the facts
   which they separately apprehend renders it more philosophical to treat them
   apart.  By feeling is meant here the sense of heat and its absence, pain of
   all kinds, and the sensuous pleasure not included under previously analyzed
   senses.  In the latter part of this category, for instance, are included
   sexual gratification, the soothing effect of manipulation, whatever it may
   be styled, <a href="Notes/n03883.html" target="bottom">mesmeric</a> or
   otherwise, and pre-eminently the exhilaration of narcotics and other
   stimuli.</p>
  <p>
   The only argument which I shall adduce to prove the comprehension of the
   feeling-phenomena within the general idea of force will be simply to call
   to my reader’s mind the fact that all such phenomena are spasmodic.  Their
   idea is that of an injected energy of motion, manifest not only in the
   nerve, but in the brain, by contraction or relaxation or both, or the
   alternation of the two states of either.</p>
  <p>
   Having endeavored, as briefly as an analysis at all satisfactory would
   permit, to test the truth of my theory with respect to each division of the
   sense, let me, in a few words, sum up the substance of that which has been
   sought to be proved.</p>
  <p>
   It is this.  That the soul in itself is capable of receiving all the 
   impressions of all the senses from the action of the object which produces
   an impression upon a single sense; that in the bodily organs only and the
   media of transmission, which are relevant to the organs alone, lies the
   necessity for a divisory action; and, finally, as a consequence of these
   propositions, that the soul, either wholly freed from its present gross
   body, or so awakened, by any cause, as to be partially independent of the
   intervention of the corporeal organs, may behold the manifold impression
   from an object which now gives it only the fractional, thus seeing,
   hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling in the most exquisite degree the
   thing which, in the state of bodily dominance, was the source of but one of
   these.</p>
  <p>
   An opinion similar to this was held by
   <a href="Notes/n66469.html" target="bottom">Coleridge</a>; and I can not
   but believe that it was suggested to him by some intimation of its truth 
   which he received while in the exaltation of opium.  Certainly there is no
   corroboration greater than he might have thus acquired for it, if the 
   effect of that drug ever reached with him the intensity which hasheesh 
   reached with me.  By evidence of the most startling character was I 
   repeatedly, while using the indulgence, put beyond all doubt upon the 
   point.  Indeed, at this day it lies before me in the light of as distinct a 
   certainty as any fact of my being.  Because, from the very nature of its 
   source, I could not transfer that certainty, in kind, to the mind of my 
   reader, I have made the attempt to approximate it by the preceding 
   argument, not because I felt at all the need of strengthening myself in 
   the faith.</p>
  <p>
   As, some distance back, I have referred to my own experience upon the
   subject, asserting <a name="quote67365" />my ability at times to <em>feel
   sights</em>, <em>see sounds</em>, &amp;c., I will not attempt to illustrate
   the present discussion by a narrative of additional portions of my own
   case.  It might be replied to me, “Ah! yes, all very likely; but probably
   you are an exception to the general rule; nobody else might be affected
   so.”  This was said to me quite
   frequently when, early in the hasheesh life, I enthusiastically related the
   most singular phenomena of my fantasië.</p>
  <p>
   But there is no such thing true of the hasheesh effects.  Just as
   inevitably as two men taking the same direction, and equally favored by
   Providence, will arrive at the same place, will two persons of similar
   temperament come to the same territory in hasheesh, see the same mysteries
   of their being, and get the same hitherto unconceived facts.  It is this
   characteristic which, beyond all gainsaying, proves the definite existence
   of the most wondrous of the hasheesh-disclosed states of mind.  The realm
   of that stimulus is no vagary; it as much exists as England.  We are never
   so absurd as to expect to see insane men by the dozen all holding to the
   same hallucination without having had any communication with each
   other.</p>
  <p>
   As I said once previously, after my acquaintance with the realm of witchery
   had become, probably, about as universal as any body’s, when I chanced to
   be called to take care of some one making the experiment for the first time
   (and I always was called), by the faintest word, often by a mere look, I
   could tell exactly the place that my patient had reached, and treat him
   accordingly.  Many a time, by some expression which other by-standers
   thought ineffably puerile, have I recognized the landmark of a field of
   wonders wherein I had traveled in perfect ravishment.  I understood the
   symbolization, which they did not.</p>
  <p>
   Particularly was this the case in the hasheesh experiment of a friend of
   mine, made not three months ago, spontaneously on his part, and unknown to
   me until I was “sent for.”  Not only was it for ecstasy and wonderful
   phenomena the most remarkable I ever had the care of, but so clear a light
   did it shed on the investigation of the few preceding pages, that I will
   give it here in place of any thing additional of my own, which, as I have
   said, I will not give.</p>
  <p>
   B——, this friend of mine, for four hours supposed that he was in heaven.
   Infinite leagues below him he heard the old, remembered bells of the world,
   and their sound, as it came floating, diminished up through the immense sky
   beneath him, seemed the only tie which bound him to any thing not
   celestial.</p>
  <p>
   As I sat by the side of the sofa on which he was lying, and held his hand
   for a greater part of the time, I became a convert to all the most
   marvelous articles of the mesmeric creed.  The connection which his 
   peculiar state of sensitiveness had established between us, made us, for
   all purposes of sensation and perception, wholly one.
   <a href="Notes/n34714.html" target="bottom">I was able to follow him</a>
   through all his ecstatic wanderings, to see what he saw, feel what he
   felt, as vividly as it is possible without myself having taken hasheesh.
   This, however, as you will say, was nothing wonderful.  It might have
   happened, and no doubt, in part, did happen, from my former thorough
   acquaintance with all such states.</p>
  <p>
   But the connection did not end here.  I drank a glass of water, and B. felt
   it as distinctly as if he had taken it himself.  He experienced the spasm
   of the muscles of the throat, which always accompanies drinking in the
   hasheesh state, so vividly that he really supposed he was drinking himself,
   and implored me to give him no more water.</p>
  <p>
   For another person in the room he had always felt strong sympathies; they
   were now developed to an extent most surprising.  This person had a habit,
   when
   <a href="Notes/n75959.html" target="bottom">in a brown study</a>,
   of industriously rubbing his forehead after a fashion painful to look upon.
   Suddenly I heard B. exclaim, “Oh, Bob, stop thinking! stop thinking! you
   don’t know how it distresses my head!”  My eyes had been upon B. all the
   time; his own had not once been opened; how could he have known that his
   friend was thinking?  I looked around, and lo!  Bob,
   <a href="Notes/n27140.html" target="bottom">in medio brown-studio</a>,
   polishing his forefront with the usual assiduity.  Merely by the sympathy
   between them B. had known it all.  This may be laughed at, but, if
   necessary, I would willingly file my affidavit that B., with his outer
   eyes, had seen nothing for half an hour previous.  I had not taken my eyes
   from his face once during that time.</p>
  <p>
   But I will go on to the facts which more immediately bear on my theory.
   While, as I have said, he had not the remotest consciousness of the place
   in which he really was, he still conversed freely with us on the basis of
   his celestial locale.</p>
  <p>
   To him, we all seemed to be together
   <a href="Notes/n30864.html" target="bottom">“in excelsis.”</a>
   Naturally he was a loving and gentle spirit; this characteristic the upper
   atmosphere brought out more fully.  In terms which it would not be modest
   for any of us to have repeated for ourselves, he expressed his sense of the
   congenialities which bound us together.  But this sense, no less
   <em>ethereal</em> than in
   the ordinary state, was something far more <em>visible</em>.</p>
  <p>
   “I <em>feel</em>,” said he, “that we have many mutual ties of fellowship, 
   but, more than that, I <em>see</em> them.  I know you are feeling kindly to 
   me now, for there are a thousand golden and azure cords which run between
   us, making a network so exquisite that it is unspeakable delight to look
   thereon.”</p>
  <p>
   “Are you not fancying it?” said somebody.  “Fancying it? how can I fancy
   that which is immediately before my eyes?  Besides that, I realize that it
   is true; it can not be false; it is a part of each of us delicately
   prolonged.  I see all our characteristics blended in it — oh, it is
   beautiful — beautiful!”</p>
  <p>
   Here was that inner sense, to which, as most intuitive, we have given by
   analogy the name of “feeling,” shown to be reciprocal, or, rather, one with
   sight.  But the oneness of the outer senses was also to receive
   corroboration.</p>
  <p>
   B. looked at us, and as our countenances changed in the course of
   conversation, that change was embodied to him in tones.  “Do you know,”
   said he, “that all your faces, your forms, have a musical idea?  I hear you
   distinctly, in harp-like notes; each one of you, as you look upon me, has
   his melody; together your appearance is a harmony.  Do you yourselves hear
   the music which you are?”</p>
  <p>
   While he lay with closed eyes we still talked to him.  Now, every sound
   which we uttered had its being to him, not only in music, but in visible
   form.  Indeed, as he afterward assured me, when in a state to philosophize
   upon the subject, he read in figures, while we were speaking, every idea as
   distinctly as from a book.  Landscapes, temples, lakes, processions of all
   kinds of being, passed before him, borne with our voices, and impressed,
   not with the artificial letter-symbols of our meaning, but with the meaning
   itself, as in my own case I have expressed it, like an essence made
   incarnate.</p>
  <p>
   The only sense which was not tested in this experience was that of odor.  I
   have deeply regretted the deficiency ever since, for I am convinced that
   its oneness with all the others would have been exhibited as clearly as
   that of the others among themselves.  Taste we did try with the fullest
   result.  After much persuasion (for it seemed a degradation of his
   celestial nature), we prevailed upon him to eat a small piece of an apple.
   I took a piece of it myself, and if I, who was in heaven, could eat, he
   might also.  Its taste he expressed as giving him likewise the idea of a
   tone.  It was winter, and not a flower of any fragrance was within reach;
   but I know from my former experience, as well as the fullness of his own in
   every other respect, that he would have emblematized it in music
   immediately.</p>
  <p>
   I would that every man whose eye is met by this recital, instead of reading
   it from my pen, and saying as coldly as is the custom at the present day,
   “marvelous, but doubtful,” with a shake of the head, could have sat as I
   did by that sofa, and have learned the truth of this strange theory by an
   eye-witness as delightful as it was convincing.  In not one single
   lineament of this case have I poetized; indeed, I feel deeply my most
   signal failure to satisfy my own ideal of what I there saw and felt.  I am
   not aware of any recompense which would tempt me, if I could, to blot out
   the memory of that most exquisite lesson which I learned at the side of
   B.</p>
  <p>
   Yet it may be said, “Your own experience had probably been pretty well
   known to him already, and these perceptions of his were but re-embodiments
   of things he had heard from you.”  I assure you, my dear reader, that of my
   own experience upon the subject of this unity of sense I had not said a
   word to him, not even to any person in the place where he lived.  His
   views, from this fact, were perfectly spontaneous, as, indeed, any one
   present could have seen from the manner of their natural and irrepressible
   outflowing in his words.  The only possible explanation of such
   perceptions, occurring as they have in several other cases besides his
   without any acquaintance with my experience, is that they apprehend real
   truths, common to all our humanity, and needing but some instrument of
   intense insight to bring them forth.</p>
  <p>
   Within a few days of this literally clinical lecture upon my theory 
   occurred another case, in some respects almost as singular.  Another 
   person, making the hasheesh experiment for the first time, showed the 
   following strange characteristic in the effect of its influence.  Though as
   perfectly conscious as in his natural state, and capable of apprehending
   all outer realities without hallucination, he still perceived every word
   which was spoken to him in the form of some visible symbol which most
   exquisitely embodied it.  For hours every sound had its color and its form
   to him as truly as scenery could have them.</p>
  <p>
   The fact, never witnessed by me before, of a mind in that state being able
   to give its phenomena to another and philosophize about them calmly,
   afforded me the means of a most clear investigation.  I found that his case
   was exactly analogous to those of B. and myself; for, like us, he
   recognized in distinct inner types every possible sensation, our words
   making a visible emblematic procession before his eyes, and every
   perception, of whatever sense, becoming tangible to him as form, and
   audible as music.</p>
  <p>
   There is something more than the mere fascinating activity of speculation
   in knowing such things as these.  The excellency of their office consists
   in acquainting us with the fact that in our minds we possess a far greater
   wealth than we have ever conceived.  Such a discovery may do much for us in
   every way, making material ends seem less valuable to us as ultimate aims,
   and encouraging us to live well for the sake of a spirit which possesses
   fathomless capacities for happiness no less than knowledge.</p>
  <p>
   There is a condition in which the soul may exist, which is possible (and
   when we have proved any thing possible for a soul, we have, at the same
   time, proved it probable), in which every object of our perception shall
   infuse into us all the delight of whose modifications now but one alone
   trickles in parsimoniously through a single sense.  With a more ethereal
   organization, the necessity for dividing our perception into the five or
   six modes now known may utterly pass away, and the full harmony of all
   qualities capable of teaching or delighting us may flow in at once to
   ravish the soul.</p>
  <p>
   In the cases which I have mentioned, hasheesh had nearly perfected this
   etherealization already.  Yet hasheesh must be forborne; we have no right
   to succeed to the inheritance till we come of age.  In our longing for that
   spiritual majority which is to invest us with our title, we may stay
   ourselves on prophecies as well as patience.</p>
  <p>
   Perchance we may listen to some such prophecy as this:  There is a land, oh
   dreamer, on which the sun rises in music, and his rays are heard sounding
   symphony to
   <a href="Notes/n47957.html" target="bottom">the greeting of Memnon</a>.
   The ever-shifting tints of cloudland forever rise into brightness and
   anthems, and fall back again to softness and lullabies.  The fingers of the
   harper paint exquisite green fields with the pencil of a tone, and the
   child that sings by his side fills the soul with
   <a href="Notes/n21615.html" target="bottom">Claude Lorraine</a>
   sunsets.  The clasp of a brother’s hand returning from
   over sea is felt in a rosy heaven, or the light of one more star and a
   thrill of glad-hearted song.  The meaning of the brotherhood between wine
   and carols is known by a strain of music from
   <a href="Notes/n62638.html" target="bottom">the terraces of Rhine and the vineyards of Xeres</a>,
   bathing the lips of the poet in added melody.  With the fall of the sun
   upon empurpled cloud-banks of the west, the fragrance of the flowers floats
   to him in a hymn of good-night, and the wind from his portals rings a
   <a href="Notes/n55045.html" target="bottom">curfew</a>
   upon lily and rose.  Land twice blessed, where all things are manifold in
   their melodies, harmonious in difference!</p>
  <p>
   Thus did I prophesy to myself, as, according to my wont, with closed eyes I
   sat listening to a sonata of Beethoven.  Within me the prophecy was even
   now half fulfilled, for I was dreaming in a land of palaces builded of
   tones, a country whose rivers ebbed and flowed with the modulations of the
   outer music.</p>
  <p>
   Are we persuaded of these things that we may be deceived? is our hope in
   vain?  There is nothing too beautiful to believe of the soul.  If its
   visions seem falsified by matter, it is only because they are above matter;
   because in prophetic gazings it mirrors a higher, a more ethereal
   incarnation of the Creative Spirit than yet communes with it through the
   passages of the fleshly sense.</p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2>Ideal Men and their Stimulants.</h2>
  <p>
   Of all the infinitely plastic shapes of language, perhaps the most
   <a href="Notes/n16499.html" target="bottom">Protean</a>
   is that word “The World.”  Monosyllable as it is, it bears upon its back a
   load of incongruous meanings immense enough to have crushed into
   nothingness a dozen of the statelier
   <a href="Notes/n07995.html" target="bottom">sesquipedalia</a>,
   which do not draw the marrow of their stubborn reality from so stanch a
   Saxon genealogy, nor plant their feet so firmly upon the usages of our
   hard, everyday life.  In that word we see the triumph of Saxonism, for it
   is astonishing how any word which means so many things has not finally come
   to mean nothing definite at all, a
   <a href="Notes/n97557.html" target="bottom">“vox et præterea nihil.”</a>
   While it has held its
   place, many other words have been banished from the common parlance of men,
   or are allowed only when they can be explained by their context, or when
   vagueness itself is an especial desideratum.</p>
  <p>
   Not to multiply instances, let the English “good” and the French
   <a href="Notes/n71451.html" target="bottom" lang="fr">“vertu”</a>
   be examples.  The first of these who ever thinks of using (we limit its
   reference to human attributes) when he wishes to express something defined
   of the character of another?  The poets only, for they, indeed, from the
   picturesque necessities of their art, have preserved its original outlines
   clear, and give it always its noble, radical force; the good man, with
   them, is the man of developed heart as distinguished from his clever
   brother of the developed intellect.  But in common conversation, to say
   that a man is good tells about as much of him as to ascribe to him the
   possession of a nose.  He may be, for all we know, a sour
   <a href="Notes/n12478.html" target="bottom">Pharisee</a>,
   held righteous in proportion to the number of things which he considers
   sins, an easy soul who does or does not pay his little bills, a kindly
   person of fluent sympathies, or
   <center><a href="Notes/n51988.html" target="bottom">
    “A good-humored dunce with the best of intentions.”
   </a></center>
   To the word “good,” a man with the
   <a href="Notes/n81562.html" target="bottom">bump of Causality</a>
   prominent must always reply “How?” and then come a host of
   particularizations on the other side to round out the idea.</p>
  <p>
   In like manner has “vertu” passed utterly out of the universal sparkling
   <a href="Notes/n81661.html" target="bottom">Gallic</a>
   mouth, not only for the reason that the idea which it embodies
   exists in a somewhat misty (as well as musty) state in the national brain,
   but because, very likely as a necessary outflow from this fact, it has been
   dissolved under the pressure of its numerous meanings into free vapor.  The
   person who cultivates “la vertu” may be conceived of as a man who prefers
   reading
   <a href="Notes/n93564.html" target="bottom">the Constitutionnel</a>
   of an evening to his wife, in slippers, to
   <a href="Notes/n41072.html" target="bottom">the society of Lorettes at the Bal au Masque</a>;
   or again, for aught that we know, he may this moment be
   <a href="Notes/n75387.html" target="bottom">looking for medallions of
   Claudius in green spectacles and Pompeii</a>.</p>
  <p>
   But “the world,” word as truly as thing, has held its course.  We do not
   confound “the man of the world” with
   <a href="Notes/n13998.html" target="bottom">Humboldt</a>,
   who has traveled all over it, nor “the ways of the world” with relations
   to its tumbling around from day to night, and
   <a href="Notes/n45115.html" target="bottom">from peri- into aph-elion</a>.
   We understand every man in the speciality of meaning which he chooses to
   stamp upon the word, and pass on without further questioning.</p>
  <p>
   With the Geographer it means — no matter, we know what it means, not
   having in early youth blasphemed to no purpose the American idea of
   universal enlightenment over an Atlas.  With the Ethnologist it is an
   affiliation of human manners; with the Philologist, a brotherhood of
   tongues.  The man of society says “the world,” and straightway it paints to
   him, if transatlantic, a vision of
   <a href="Notes/n87838.html" target="bottom">Almacks and the Clubs</a>;
   if
   <a href="Notes/n59877.html" target="bottom">cisatlantic</a>,
   a prodigality of entreés on the Avenue.
   A circle of spinsters whisper the mystic symbol over
   <a href="Notes/n62630.html" target="bottom">souchong</a>,
   and lo! at uncontaminating distance, a dream of deluded souls dancing into
   inevitable destruction to
   <a href="Notes/n78105.html" target="bottom">a Redowa discoursed from Dodworth’s balefully-fascinating tubes</a>.
   Yet, by a more catholic appreciation than we give to any other word, in
   each case we catch the full force of the particular idea.  O world, as word
   alone, truly there is
   <a href="Notes/n27106.html" target="bottom">no “transit” to thy “gloria.”</a></p>
  <p>
   Yet, from the very ease with which it carries its multiplicity of meaning,
   we are apt to forget how manifold they really are.  We thus lose sight of a
   truth, than which there is none more actual, that, though we intermarry,
   walk, talk, and transact business together, we are each of us, this moment,
   living in a different world.</p>
  <p>
   Even as a mere bald question of the bodily senses, this is beyond a doubt.
   A is a near sighted man, and has a very defective power of discriminating
   colors.  Like several men whom I know, he may be utterly unable to
   distinguish the strawberry from its leaf, or, like certain others, to
   discriminate between the fly on his spectacles and the eagle in the
   firmament.  B, on the other hand, sees ships in the offing before the
   signal-man has got the focus, and pronounces dogmatically, at a glance,
   between two shades of blue which do not differ from each other by a tenth.
   A and B live in two absolutely different sight-worlds.</p>
  <p>
   Again, C perceives no difference between sounds or harmonies.  He is, let
   us say, a celebrated divine whom I have the honor to know.  Some years ago,
   when
   <a href="Notes/n19123.html" target="bottom">“Oh Susannah”</a>
   was triumphantly ushering in
   <a href="Notes/n29029.html" target="bottom">the Ethiopian school of composition</a>
   to popular favor, a roguish daughter of the gentleman happened
   to be playing that exquisite air upon the piano, and (much as I regret to
   state it) upon a Sunday morning also.  Her father, struck with the novel
   beauty of the music, although he had heard it fifty times before, asked 
   what it was, and was answered, with a sense of security which based itself
   upon his peculiar auricular failing, that it was
   <a href="Notes/n09808.html" target="bottom">“Greenland’s icy mountains.”</a></p>
  <p>
   In the evening all the family were assembled in the parlor, and Dr. ——
   asked the fair rogue to play the piece that had so much pleased him in the
   morning.  Of course, by the family, “Oh Susannah” was reckoned among
   secular melodies, and, to speak popularly, would not “go down.”  Without a
   moment’s hesitation, Miss —— awoke the instrument to “Greenland,” and the
   doctor was as perfectly satisfied as he had been ten hours before.</p>
  <p>
   Such a one we will say is C.  D, on the contrary, recognizes fifteen
   gradations between F and G of the natural scale, and whistles every air in
   <a href="Notes/n83321.html" target="bottom">Trovatore</a>
   on his way home from its first performance at the Academy.  If an
   itinerant miller of music,
   <a href="Notes/n23339.html" target="bottom">“knowing the wally of peace and quietness,”</a>
   refuses to move under a shilling, he makes over the additional sixpence and
   thinks it clear gain.</p>
  <p>
   The sound-worlds of C and D are as truly twain as Mars and Jupiter.</p>
  <p>
   But I will not consume the letters of the alphabet in any further analysis
   of a statement so apparent to the slightest thought.  Just briefly, in
   their relations to the remaining senses, let me set the opposite types 
   apart.</p>
  <p>
   In Touch, on one side stands the artisan who, with his finger, can measure
   that convexity in a lens which few men could determine by the eye; on the
   other, the person who scarcely, by his hand, discovers any inequality in a
   board, provided it be planed.  In connection with the former, I might
   mention such a case as that of Giovanni Gonelli, of Volterra, who, in the
   seventeenth century, gave to the world the spectacle of a man entirely
   blind, yet a most accurate sculptor, not alone of his own ideals, but of
   faces which he only knew by passing his hand over them.  Among the
   likenesses which he left were those, both faithful and beautiful, of Cosmo
   di Medici, Pope Urban VIII., and the first Charles of England.  Yet, though
   I have refrained, on account of the exceptional nature of this case, I
   might well adduce other instances of blind dexterity and delicacy of touch
   far from exceptional.</p>
  <p>
   Again, in Smell, there are innumerable grades between the person in whom it
   is an absolute lack and the one to whom, our world being unfortunately not
   a universal spice-grove, it is a source of constant misery.  At this moment
   I am writing but
   <a href="Notes/n46467.html" target="bottom">a few feet</a>
   from a lady who, a day or two ago, assured me
   that if, by any operation, however painful, she could eradicate her sense
   of smell without danger, she would willingly submit to it, even though it
   cost her those rose and jasmine odors in which she delights with more
   intensity than practical people do in a good dinner.</p>
  <p>
   In Taste we may shade off humanity between the two extremes of an
   <a href="Notes/n56272.html" target="bottom">Apicius</a>,
   desolé on account of the one quarter grain of ambergris more than
   the receipt in his soup of flamingos’ tongues, and the Scotchman who,
   outside of his herring and his bannocks, is at sea upon all delicate
   questions of gustative interest.</p>
  <p>
   In Feeling, as defined in the preceding note, the sense, to speak in
   general terms, of pains and pleasures not comprehended by other organs, the
   grades are almost innumerable.</p>
  <p>
   There is a case on record of a lady so exquisitely constituted in this
   respect that the recital of another’s pain in any particular member
   immediately made her feel it acutely in her own.  I might offset to this
   the instance of a person who avowed to me that the extraction of the
   largest molar give her as little suffering as the scratch of a pin, and she
   dreaded no possible operation to such an extent as to care to use an
   anæsthetic.  Since she was at all times characteristically matter of
   fact, and never adorned the blank reality of her ideas with fiction, I had
   no reason to doubt that she rigorously meant what she said.</p>
  <p>
   Here, then, we see both nature and cultivation making infinite variety in
   individual acuteness and range of all the senses.  In the words of the
   great
   <a href="Notes/n31103.html" target="bottom">Chadband, “What does this teach us?”</a></p>
  <p>
   There is, no doubt, an objective world, a something external to our
   perception, and outside of our originating energy, which produces the
   effects by us called collectively “the world.”  Yet, in order to become a
   thing perceived, that something must undergo a modification by our organs,
   which, after all, makes us as truly actors in the being of the world, for
   all purposes of perception, as if we had helped to create it.  Accordingly
   as the senses vary, so also will the world vary,
   <a href="Notes/n02001.html" target="bottom">becoming all things to all men</a>;
   and literally the same thing to no two men.  So, not metaphorically at
   all, but in the most restricted sense, every human being of us has his own
   world which no other man has any conception of, and this, too, with all our
   senses wide open, and, if you please, looking in the same direction.  Only
   upon abstract mathematical truths, or on the forum of axioms, do we ever
   come exactly together, and do business with each other by the same
   balances.  Once off of this common ground, and, though we talk about things
   the same in words, we mean something which we see and feel very
   differently.  The husband does not know exactly how his voice sounds to his
   wife, nor the wife whether to her husband her face looks precisely as it 
   does to herself in the glass.  All that they can be tolerably sure of in
   their intercourse with one another is that they hit the same general and
   necessary facts.</p>
  <p>
   But if in the mere bodily senses we find such different worlds, how much
   more is it the case in our spiritual organism.  From the characteristic of
   this variation we utterly exempt that faculty of direct insight which
   beholds truths that are necessary and therefore universal.  This, which may
   be called the Intuition of Truth, is not only the same in its perceptions,
   but pretty nearly equal in its scope among all men.
   <a href="Notes/n31202.html" target="bottom">None but idiots</a>,
   of whatever land or tribe, could fail to see that a straight line is the
   shortest distance between two points, and in the field of ideas to which
   that belongs there is at present a small harvest of similar facts, and none
   but men preternaturally exalted have reaped any more from richer
   heights.</p>
  <p>
   Leave this plane, and we are all irreconcilable again.  That which is one
   man’s darling goal in life is the loathing or hatred of his neighbor.  We
   are astonished at each other’s attachments; and while we forget
   <a href="Notes/n58418.html" target="bottom">the old “de gustibus” aphorism</a>,
   we forget also another thing whose remembrance would be much more apt to
   keep us calm than any dogmatic assertion of a fact without its reasons,
   like that of the proverb.  My dear sir, the object of your
   friend’s attachment you do not perceive in the slightest.  With the index
   of a word out of your common dictionary he points in a certain direction.
   You look, and see something which does not please you.  Do not growl for
   that fact; if he had your spiritual eyes, he would see something that did
   not please him; had you his, you would see an object as lovable as he
   himself sees.</p>
  <p>
   The importance of a proposed measure, the value of a certain end to be
   secured, are utterly different with different individual judgments.  The
   majority which wins the day must not be understood as a body of men who all
   think alike.  Each individual mind composing it sees the question in a
   light varying by inexpressible shades from that which illuminates each of
   his colleagues.  The majority is nothing more nor less than a collection of
   minds who, seeing one proposition in certain connections, varying in each 
   case, think they all understand it as the same, and consent to let go their
   minor views with relation to it for the sake of carrying through that which
   on the whole they believe to be the best, though for very different
   ends.</p>
  <p>
   There are philosophers who seriously lament over this infinite variance of
   perceptions, judgments, and feelings, as if it were the grand obstacle in
   the track of human perfection.</p>
  <p>
   Deferentially, though candidly, I acknowledge that I think this a mistake.
   Indeed, the problem of our humanity standing as it does thus — Given our
   present nature, and the necessity arising out of it that investigation
   should be the instrument of acquiring wisdom, what is the best possible
   contrivance for furthering the operation?  I would reply, this very state
   of omnipresent variance.  Supposing that suddenly, and just at the point in
   all science which we have now reached, the law of mind should change, and,
   a great average being struck, we should all, not to make an extreme case by
   saying throughout the world, but merely over its civilized area,
   henceforward see every thing precisely alike, and precisely alike be
   affected by every thing which we saw — it seems to me that a worse
   calamity could not happen to mankind.  The wheels of our spiritual progress
   now roll somewhat erratically, it is true, as the impulse of the hosts who
   urge on the chariot is stronger now on this side, now on that, but the
   resultant of all the forces is a rapid and a forward motion.  The check
   which would ensue to that progress from the coming in of an entire
   uniformity would be sufficient to retard for centuries the millennium of
   mind.  True, all would push in one direction, but the grand
   <a href="Notes/n30727.html" target="bottom">nisus</a>,
   the energy of ambition, would be lost.</p>
  <p>
   In the contests — yes, even in the quarrels of opinion, we have a
   guarantee for the development of truth.  Fertility is not the
   characteristic of unbroken plains; they become the torrid desert or the icy
   steppe; but it bestows itself upon a grouping of entire opposites; the
   peaks catch the clouds, and with them water the valleys.  As the collision
   of flint and steel gives fire, so from the crashing together of many
   adverse views comes out Truth, the bright, the beautiful, the eternal.  Let
   us thank God that human thought and human feeling are not one vast stagnant
   lake, but a sea whose ever-struggling and colliding waves keep their mass
   pure, and cleanse the intellectual atmosphere.</p>
  <p>
   Our great need is not a reducing to uniformity, but a purging from all
   acrimony in our contests, the infusion of a willingness to permit and a
   readiness to appreciate all those differences of form, which, in every one
   of our neighbors, opinion must necessarily take.  We have not all to bow
   down at the same shrine, but to respect those of all other men while we
   worship at our own; to put down the iconoclastic hammer, though not
   pretending to burn incense before one great average god of sentiment.</p>
  <p>
   This tolerance is yet to be learned, for it is not a remarkably flourishing
   virtue even of the nineteenth century.  Our great advance at this day has
   been made in the direction of refining our intolerance.  For the stake and
   the dungeon have been substituted the taunt and the sneer, an invective
   which burns more lingeringly than the former, and a neglect which surpasses
   the latter in its fatal chill.  We have yet to open our ears to the Past,
   which, up to our present summit of enlightenment and vision, is calling
   forever, in sad and earnest litany, “By
   <a href="Notes/n14910.html" target="bottom">Smithfield and the Lollards’ Tower</a>,
   by the poverty of confiscation and the weariness of banishment, by the
   blood of
   <a href="Notes/n15789.html" target="bottom">Savonarola</a>,
   and
   <a href="Notes/n11286.html" target="bottom">Galileo shut up in prison from his stars</a>,
   be merciful — be tolerant!”</p>
  <p>
   There is one excellent result of this great multiplicity of worlds which we
   seldom value as we ought.  Who that of a morning walks up Broadway, in one
   of the two currents of that hurrying life, does not wonder that all the
   thousands who are rushing on, each for the sustenance or gratification of
   self, do not oftener jostle through that very selfishness, that the crowds
   do not interpenetrate each other with more friction?  As a fact, we see
   them tolerably calm, obliging, and self-continent.  As a problem, supposing
   it given to a philosopher who calculated only upon the data of our
   well-known human selfishness, could he solve it?  Something else is
   requisite for the solution.  We are none of us aiming at precisely the same
   mark.  With no two men do the points on the target exactly coincide.  The
   most similar of us still aim a hair’s-breadth out of each other’s way, and
   thus, in the great match, unless intentionally we tread on each others’
   <a href="Notes/n96533.html" target="bottom">kibes</a>,
   there is room for us all.</p>
  <p>
   If we wished to make a general distinctive classification which, in one way
   or another, would comprehend our whole humanity, living in its different
   worlds, there are perhaps no two divisions which would so nearly comprehend
   it all as those of Ideal and Non-Ideal.  Each of these forms is a Kosmos by 
   itself, which, from its great interior diversity, might, even as thus
   coaggregated, be properly translated rather system than world; but for our
   uses the narrower rendering will do, since all the grander laws of each
   Kosmos are the same for each of its inhabitants.</p>
  <p>
   By these terms, Ideal and Non-Ideal, we mean very much the same ideas that
   a poet would get from “Visionary” and “Practical;” but these phrases are
   not of sufficiently catholic interpretation, the former not justly
   embodying that sneer, nor the latter that praise, which the language of
   conversation conveys in them.</p>
  <p>
   We have spoken of the intuitional perception as a common ground for all
   men, limiting, however, the assertion to that branch of the intuitional
   which has its object in universal truth, and thus meaning that every body
   acknowledges an equal force in axioms; and, however we may dispute on other
   points, all agree that the whole, for instance, is equal to all its parts.
   Yet there are two other fields of the intuitional, which, so far from their
   being equally expatiated in by all men, are to some merely known by
   glimpses, to others, we might almost believe, entirely shut.  These are
   Beauty and Good, higher than Truth, and therefore neither so much needed in
   our lower affairs, nor so much opened to all mankind by nature or
   cultivation.</p>
  <p>
   Both the Good and the Beautiful forming each an ideal by itself, for our
   present purpose we need only treat with the latter.  It is in relation to
   the Beautiful particularly that we wish to exemplify this classification of
   the Ideal and Non-Ideal.</p>
  <p>
   That beauty is really an ideal, something of the thought inner to us, and
   not coming in through the passages of the sense from without, is too little
   perceived in our inaccurate every-day thought, and too little granted even
   in our moods of calmer philosophy.  For this as for so many of our other
   perversions, we have to thank the sense-theories.</p>
  <p>
   We may examine the matter without a very painful analysis.  Treading
   reverently and softly, as becometh
   <a href="Notes/n93488.html" target="bottom">umbræ</a>
   who intrude upon the privacy of great men, let us steal into
   <a href="Notes/n95618.html" target="bottom">Abbotsford</a>,
   and stand by the chair of Walter Scott, who is looking at a sunset.  By
   his side, upon the floor beneath us, lies that faithful companion of his
   strolls among the heather, Maida.  Since the test we are about to institute
   demands fairness, we will free our comparison from all imputation of
   artifice by placing together with the noblest specimen of man the noblest
   specimen of beast.</p>
  <p>
   Both the poet and the greyhound are looking westward.  The same tints fall
   through the panes upon the faces of both; far up, toward the springs of
   Tweed, they see the same hills bathed in a dying light, and the clouds that
   shift above them.  Does it surprise us to hear Sir Walter bursting forth in
   enrapturement; or, truer still, as a
   <a href="Notes/n60375.html" target="bottom">meed</a>
   of the heart to beauty, see him silently gazing toward the sundown with a
   face which glows and changes,
   telling more than a thousand lips?  But would we be astonished or not if
   Maida should suddenly give vent to a lyric bark of ecstasy, or even should
   she refuse to be wheedled from the glories of that view by the whistle of a
   keeper immemorially associated with dog-meat?  Not in the least, you will
   say; and most people would agree with you; for a hound who appreciated
   sunsets would be as great a sensation, even in our most
   <a href="Notes/n02416.html" target="bottom">nil admirari</a>
   world, as a cow, who,
   <a href="Notes/n67563.html" target="bottom">like Landor, should write feelingly upon green grass</a>,
   and publish it.  He would have the entreé of all literary circles;
   dinners would be pressed upon him; he would be presented with services of
   plate; not an album would be without the autograph of this veritable
   <a href="Notes/n10023.html" target="bottom">Prince di Canino</a>.
   Eclipsed in the blinding glory of his eclat, the
   <a href="Notes/n32919.html" target="bottom">learned pig</a>
   would commit suicide by surfeit, and the
   <a href="Notes/n13823.html" target="bottom">accomplished fleas</a>
   end their mortification with their own poison.</p>
  <p>
   But why?
   <a href="Notes/n89961.html" target="bottom">A cat may look at a king</a>,
   why not a dog at a sunset?
   <a href="Notes/n12717.html" target="bottom">“Hath not a dog eyes?  Hath not a dog paws, organs, dimensions, senses?”</a>
   Yet, with quite as much astonishment as Shylock asked,</p>
   <blockquote>
    “Hath a dog money? is it possible<br />
    &nbsp;A cur can lend three thousand ducats?”
   </blockquote><p>
   do we all inquire, “Can a dog see beauty in a sunset?”</p>
  <p>
   Anatomically we dissect his eyes, and (especially if he be a gaze-hound)
   find them far better calculated than man’s for length and breadth of
   vision.  In all respects they will compare favorably with the same piece of
   human organism, granting the latter even at the rarest point of
   development.</p>
  <p>
   Far deeper than any sense lies this subtle appreciation.  There is a
   something in the outer world which does not impress itself on the retina,
   and of which the mere visual image is but a type.  That which delights us
   is the peculiar essences of things, and the intangible relation of harmony
   which the essences, manifold in unity, bear to each other and ourselves.
   In lakes, and mountains, and sky there is beauty to us, because the same
   Creator lies behind and continues us all.  Sprung from the same source, we
   have a fitness for each other, arising out of the very fact that in our own
   souls and the world also creative spirit is making itself manifest; in the
   tangency of the two there is a delightful communion between spirit and 
   spirit, and for the beast this does not exist, since he is not spirit.
   This very capability which we possess of expressing this communion in
   language, shows that it is not through sense that the Beautiful flows in,
   for what can be conceived as more cruel, more in every way unnatural, than
   that the hound, with senses like our own, should still be dumbly shut up to
   an impossibility of expression, if, while standing by our side, he was
   overburdened with the same loveliness as we?  The idea is indeed
   horrible.</p>
  <p>
   Yet doubtless we may wrong the animal upon the other side.  Few of us being
   willing to carry out the sense philosophy to its ultimate conclusions by
   giving the dog perception of Beauty equally with ourselves, we often go to
   the opposite extreme, and rather pity him as a being without gratifications
   beyond the present bone, hearth-rug, or exciting chase.  He very likely
   enjoys contemplation as much, proportionally to his kind, as we do.  Not
   the contemplation of the beautiful in nature indeed, but of some other
   characteristic, which has as true a fitness to his constitution as Beauty
   has to ours.  What this is, of course, from the entire difference of our
   plane of being, we can only conjecture.</p>
  <p>
   It may be something such as this: in the creation there is a capability of
   sustaining animal life through food, atmosphere, and a variety of means.
   To us this capability seldom appears except as a logical deduction, in the
   form of statistics or agricultural history.  To the animal it may appear
   stamped upon all surrounding things; it may be for him the essential truth
   which they embody, and in trees, herbage, fruitage, he may feel the
   symbolized principle which prophesies the sustenance of his highest life as
   our ideals prophesy ours.  The Creator, who
   <a href="Notes/n80576.html" target="bottom">careth even for sparrows</a>,
   and will not let them feel themselves unsupported in this great lonely
   world, may on this lower basis commune with the beast, and by it give him a
   suggestion of His good-will toward him, which in his case may be the source
   of an enjoyment measurably keen with our own.</p>
  <p>
   But through the Beautiful He talks with man only, and to him alone the
   fitness of the conscious and unconscious creations are expressed in this
   way.  It is a memory of the elder time to be cherished, even though it be
   the memory of something heard only in dreams, that all men long ago, in
   ages however primeval, realized Beauty, and answered back its thrill with
   gladness and hymns.  Such a remembrance — yes, if you will say so, even
   such a dream — is like some not yet extinguished echo of the Creation
   strophe and antistrophe,
   <a href="Notes/n81349.html" target="bottom">when, on the one side, “the
   morning stars sang together,” and, on the other, “all the sons of God
   shouted for joy.”</a></p>
  <p>
   Sadly enough, many of the latter band of singers have been struck dumb
   since that day.  It might be painful to read a census, could we get such a
   thing, of the persons who love or even recognize Beauty, by itself and for
   its own unmarketable sake.  The bulk of such a document would probably
   depend upon the style of man who went around through humanity to compile
   it.  A poet would make sad work.  His best questions would be so analytic
   as either to render him unintelligible or obnoxious.  At some houses he 
   would be answered, “No, I am no visionary;” and at others, “Clear out!  Do
   you mean to insult me?  Can not I see Beauty?  Isn’t this a beautiful day,
   to be sure, with the sun shining so bright that I can get in all my hay?”
   At all events, he would come home, without having found it necessary to
   purchase another valise for the conveyance of his papers.</p>
  <p>
   Whatever may be the reason, it can not be doubted that there is a great
   difference between men in the appreciation of the subtle characteristic,
   and in some it seems to be entirely lacking.  There is one class of men who
   exult in beauty, who live in it, whose extreme representatives are willing
   even to commit all sorts of practical extravagances for its sake.  There is
   another, whose members look at a statue of
   <a href="Notes/n72613.html" target="bottom">Phidias</a>,
   and then at a gate-post, and in both see only something hard, white, and
   tall.</p>
  <p>
   Yet they both have to live in what is geographically the same world.  It is
   of the ideal man, as representative of the former class, and of some of his
   relations to that world, that we have to speak.  A greater breadth of these
   relations than might at first sight be supposed is included in the
   question.  Why do ideal men often use narcotics?  Indisputably it is ideal
   men.  The fact is there, however great a pity it may be.  Let us seek, for
   a while, an answer to the question.</p>
  <p>
   The wants of the ideal man, while in number less than those of his
   opposite, in degree are far greater.
   <a href="Notes/n40355.html" target="bottom">Dives</a>,
   as the type of the pure worldly life, is as incapable as guiltless of those
   vague, unsatisfied longings which he so much censures in a neighbor and
   discourages in a dependent.  All things out of which he can extort pleasure
   coin themselves for him in a perfectly tangible shape.  He is fully
   satisfied, his wishes need no additional fulfillment to make a complete
   orb, if his balance strikes accurately at the counting-room, if he can go
   home behind his own horses when too tired to walk, his dinner is good, his
   wife handsome, his house comfortable, his daughters well settled, his sons
   imitating their
   father.  All these requisitions he can lay his hand on; if he could not,
   his longings would not be vague; he would know what he wanted, and, under
   ordinary circumstances, could get it in time.</p>
  <p>
   Ariel, on the other hand, is contented with a catalogue of enjoyments in
   numerical and money value far less.  It was not he who originated that
   sneer upon
   <a href="Notes/n22379.html" target="bottom">love in a cottage</a>.
   He was filled with infinitely more than the
   mere satisfaction of their material by the woodbine which clambered around
   his windows, the roses leading from the door-step to the gate, the lake
   below him, the mountains on the other side, the fruit and the loaf upon his
   table, and the other cleanly and kindly answers to his domestic needs.</p>
  <p>
   But the tax-gatherer came to spy out the land, the insatiate genius of
   mill-building looked at the brook which ran by his garden, and pronounced
   it a “location.”</p>
  <p>
   Presently the waters began to run foul with dye and sawdust, gigantic
   band-wheels spun and hummed where birds had sung; there was a creaking, a
   dust, a baleful fire night and day, which invaded his library and his
   dreams.  Provisions rose; the simplest fare upon which he had kept together
   soul and body now stood just where his labors could reach it upon
   tiptoe.</p>
  <p>
   So strongly, while it does cling, does the body pull upon the soul, that,
   though we may be spiritually happy without being sumptuous, we can not, at
   the same time, be spiritual and hungry.  At least most of us can not.  Into
   what a glory, looked at through such a fact, does the
   <a href="Notes/n60451.html" target="bottom">Massinger</a>
   tower who, with one hand stiffly holding the wolf at arm’s length, with the
   other can indite the Virgin Martyr.  Yes, there have been some such souls
   after all.</p>
  <p>
   But our Ariel, being of less muscular make, is not among them.  His
   <a href="Notes/n14553.html" target="bottom">“mind to him a kingdom is,”</a>
   but he is expatriated from it on a foraging expedition; through
   <a href="Notes/n06417.html" target="bottom">the jaws of Scylla and Charybdis</a>,
   starvation on the one hand, and the premature old age of over-wrought
   energies, he is voyaging in a supply-ship.  If even now he could sit still
   in an occasional lull, and grow better by drinking in beauty, and make
   other men happier by imparting it to them through words, writing, or kindly
   offices, he sees only money-utility stamped upon the rivers, and the whole
   face of nature is staked off into building-lots or manufactory-sites.  The
   features of his goddess have become the “desirable features” for a
   paper-speculation town.</p>
  <p>
   There are a thousand ways in which his neighbors can evaporate the essence
   which is all in all to him, while they at the same time give to his scenery
   a ponderable value which to them is worth far more.</p>
  <p>
   Perhaps, like
   <a href="Notes/n69152.html" target="bottom">Southey</a>,
   he now out and out curses the mills.  But this is
   wrong; for Southey, though a noble poet in spite of the insolence of Byron,
   was still no great political economist, notwithstanding the opinion of
   himself.  Perhaps, therefore, he only sighs, and moves his household gods
   to another hearth — it may be where loneliness will better secure him from
   disturbance, it may be where labors of his particular kind yield fuller
   sustenance to the crying wants of life.  The pangs of such a moving are
   little known to any one but himself, or, if he has God’s crowning gift in a
   deep-feeling and congenial wife, to her alone beside him.  The men of the
   world can not hear
   <a href="Notes/n94663.html" target="bottom">the groans of the uprooted
   mandrakes</a>.</p>
  <p>
   There is the hill-top, upon which, first of all visible things, his eyes
   for so many years have lighted in awaking.  It has grown to be to him the
   only summit over which it could be conceived possible for the sun to rise.
   There is the lake along whose shores he has led his children, calling them
   to watch its hues and dimples at evening; along those same shores, mayhap,
   his father led him.  Every tree, as far as the skirt of the horizon, is
   known to him; he has wandered over every slope; he has dreamed or written
   suggestions in his note-book upon every crag.  The whole scenery has been
   to him his school, his gymnasium, his holiday-ground.  He must leave it
   all.</p>
  <p>
   And his house — it was there that he felt upon his forehead, in blessing,
   the hands of the now long dead; here, many a year ago, he knew man’s only
   peace except death, childhood — knew it for a little time, while his locks
   were sunny and the grave shadows yet tarried from his face — then vanished
   it away.  Hither he led home his new-made wife; here,
   <a href="Notes/n08330.html" target="bottom">“into something rich and strange,”</a>
   blossomed that mystic, intangible relation of delights when a
   child was born to the bosoms which are twain, yet one; here, with his
   children, in the firelight gambols he kindled the dampened torch of the
   younger time, and for one evening was a child again.</p>
  <p>
   Here, too, is his library — that cave in the rock above the world’s high
   tide, set farther in than the surges beat or the winds blow.  The tide has
   reached it now.  There are waves and sea-weed on the floor at flood — they
   do not all go out at ebb.  Where can he read but at that window?  Where can
   he write but on that desk and against that wall?  How can the old familiar
   animus of the place be left behind, unless his own soul, which had grown
   its twin, stays with it?  Yet how can the animus be transported?  No, no,
   it can not.  It knows no luggage trains; it is not a thing of drays.</p>
  <p>
   Every where the tentacles of his root must give way with a wrench; the
   necessity being granted, the pain is inevitable; the only remedy, a manly
   patience under the irremediable — the
   <center><a href="Notes/n33873.html" target="bottom">
    “Quicquid corrigere est nefas.”
   </a></center>
   Now if he were to tell Dives all this, taking him into his confidence,
   would he not laugh?  “What is the sense,” would be the reply of that
   satisfied person, “in fashing your beard about one place or another?  If 
   you are going to town, you will probably take a far better house than this
   trumpery cottage — four stories high, free-stone front, all the modern
   improvements, and
   <a href="Notes/n55261.html" target="bottom">eligible situation</a>.
   Why, my dear sir, you must be mad!  Think what an exchange — gas instead of
   <a href="Notes/n70400.html" target="bottom">spermaceti</a>; bathing
   apparatus, with warm, cold, and shower cocks, instead of this portable
   concern you have here, or perhaps instead of a mere swim in your two-penny
   lake; the market within ten minutes’ staging; shopping conveniences for
   your wife; a daily laid, still wet, on your door-step — every thing
   imaginable, in place of this uncultivated, mountainous, windy, woody
   situation, out of call of express-wagons and solid respectability.  Or, if
   you are going still farther into the woods (which, I own, is very foolish,
   since you might stay here and put up a saw-mill on your own part of the
   brook, which would make you one of our first manufacturers), there is still
   no such cause as you seem to think for sorrow at moving.  Probably, where
   you will settle, vegetables and all provisions are far cheaper — you can
   get your wood for almost nothing — and certainly those are advantages that
   a man need not pull a long face over.  Be a man.  Satisfy yourself with the
   world, as I do.”</p>
  <p>
   Ah! unction not in Ariel’s pharmacopœia!  He is hurt where such salves
   will not heal him.</p>
  <p>
   In many a way may the sources of his enjoyment be dried up or imbittered
   which the world knows not of.  The ideal nature is indeed a harp of many
   wondrous strings, but the airs that play upon it in this life are seldom of
   the gentlest.  The one-stringed Hawaiian guitar of the non-ideal man is
   easily thrummed, and never lacks tone save when its proper backbone of
   material well-being is temporarily lax.</p>
  <p>
   If any of us, even the most tender and spiritually appreciative, could
   understand the various intensity with which this law works out its office
   in other men of the same nature, we would be much kinder in our judgment of
   the man who runs to narcotics and other stimulants for relief, while we
   regarded the habit as no less grievous.  Could we, for example, enter
   thoroughly into the constitution of such a one as
   <a href="Notes/n66469.html" target="bottom">Coleridge</a>; could we
   realize his temptations to the full extent; understand his struggles, and
   weigh all the forces of the mind which gave him, from his very birth, a
   perilous tendency, how much oftener with tears than with denunciations of
   his indolence, his neglect of duties, would we read such memorials of him
   as have been published, much as the most of those seem directed to bias us
   in the contrary way.</p>
  <p>
   For it seems as if there has never been a real “Life” of Coleridge.
   We have had,
   in abundance, sketches of what he himself might have called his “phenomenal
   existence.”  We have the changes of place which he made; the towns in which
   he lectured; the letters from home which he did not open, and the
   correspondences for aid in starvation which he did open; the worth, in
   pounds sterling, of the
   <a href="Notes/n32360.html" target="bottom">laudanum</a>
   which he drank per week; the number of
   bottles of brandy which he emptied in the same time; the extravagances of
   his expenditure; his repentings, his concessions to Southey and
   <a href="Notes/n21273.html" target="bottom">Cottle</a>.
   All these are phenomenal — yea, even the last three.  We have external
   events — movements of which we do not see the motor.  Perhaps it would be
   impossible to see it from any thing but an autobiography so full, so
   <a href="Notes/n17075.html" target="bottom">ab intra</a>,
   that pain and humiliation would deter him from writing it, were he living.
   This would be a “Life” of Coleridge; the others are mere results of that
   life.</p>
  <p>
   Perhaps the best substitute for such a work is to be found in his brief and
   fragmentary prose works; for, although they have almost nothing of that
   narrative style which is supposed to be necessary to the legitimate
   memoirs, they still show us, to a degree unequaled by any thing extant,
   Coleridge, the Man and the Mind.</p>
  <p>
   A man he was to whom the world of his imagination and his reason was far
   more than that wherein he reaped his honors and his daily bread.  Sensitive
   as a child to that intangible yet infinite meaning which is expressed in
   frowns and smiles, in love, scorn, and neglect; by nature gifted with an
   insight into her excellencies which cultivation and the other circumstances
   of his progressive being made at times even morbidly acute; living, by the
   very necessity of his particular inborn law of life, at the very summit of 
   his energies, he had worn out nerve and elasticity at an age when,
   according to all ordinary judgments which base themselves on insurance
   averages and statistics of longevity, he should have been in the prime of
   his life, and battling his way with fortitude to a competency.  He
   exhausted by mighty drafts all his credit at the bank of healthful life,
   and that is a corporation which never permits us to overdraw.  Up to the
   very last deposit of blood and sinew, nerve and spirit, prompt payment will
   meet every demand; then comes the crash, and the bankrupt nature is no
   longer known on
   <a href="Notes/n94902.html" target="bottom">’Change</a>.
   If all that we know of Coleridge from without, the statement of himself and
   his contemporaries, did not intimate to us
   that such was the case with him, we might determine that it would
   necessarily happen so, à priori, from that which we know of the
   mental constitution of the man.</p>
  <p>
   He tells us through his memorializer, Cottle, and the others who have
   written about him, that he first used opium as a remedy for disease — a
   painful disease of the legs — that he found its effects a delicious and
   perfect relief.  Furthermore, that he abandoned it with the completion of
   his cure, but resumed it upon his finding, with the abandonment, the pains
   return.  That he made several attempts to free himself with the same
   termination, and at last settled down into the opium-eater which he was for
   it is impossible to say how many years of his life.</p>
  <p>
   All this we have no reason to doubt.  As an alleviative to severe pain the
   narcotic first became known to him.  Yet the secret of its excessive use,
   the rapidly increasing doses, beyond all the demands of the body for relief
   — what was that?  Ah! the poet himself would confess that to his mind the
   indulgence spoke with a fascination far greater than to his physical
   nature.  It was, in fact, the very thing necessary for the replenishment of
   his exhausted capability of enjoyment.</p>
  <p>
   How is it, we must ask, that opium acts upon the whole organism of a
   susceptible man?  Physically the books of medicine tell us how — that is,
   to a certain distance they mark its pathway through digestion, circulation,
   the sympathetic nerves, and, where it causes death, leave it in an
   engorgement of the brain.</p>
  <p>
   Probably all these phenomena are the merely external ones; they do not at
   all give us the mode of its action, after all.  At one time, in the course
   of some experiments, I thought I had reached a little deeper principle of
   its operation; some singular facts led me to form a theory upon the
   subject.  I will not give it here, since there is not yet a basis of tests
   broad enough for it to rest upon philosophically.  Of all specific actions,
   that of narcotics is conceded by physicists universally to be one of the
   most recondite.  Hardly any thing is really known about it by the
   practitioner more than by his unscientific patient.  We have mere facts
   ungrouped about their governing principle.</p>
  <p>
   But mentally we know its working better.  Opium supersedes, and, by long
   continuance in its indulgence, actually extirpates that vital force out of
   which arise hope, insight into excellencies, fortitude, volition, and
   volition made permanent in perseverance.  It is an artificial energy
   destructive to all natural; men habituated to it live on when what is
   called the nervous life is perfectly extinct.</p>
  <p>
   That Coleridge could not
   have continued to live at all without such energy in some form is evident 
   from the whole constitution of the man.  Without the ever-present sensitive
   perception of spiritual beauty for which such an energy was necessary,
   house, lands, comfortable family arrangements, the remunerative place in
   the Quarterly which his friends procured him would have seemed mere
   <a href="Notes/n53819.html" target="bottom">eidola</a>.  He hungered and
   thirsted for the spiritual.  The world of dreams which he had built up in his
   <a href="Notes/n70026.html" target="bottom">“Pantisocracy”</a>
   had been exhaled under the
   pressure of daily-bread necessities when to his fortuneless bosom he took a
   portionless wife.  It is impossible that such a nature as his, emptied of
   the ideal Utopia, should be long void of something else as ideal.  And so
   through all his life we see him forgetting hunger in dreams till it bites 
   him to the heart.  Then he starts up to spasmodic exertion, to sleep again
   in visions when the foe is driven to a respectful distance.  Call this
   wrong, call it undutiful to relationships which he was bound to respect,
   yet you can not call it indolence.  He was not fitted by nature to do the
   work of a material life, yet higher obligations called him to change his
   element, and he should have obeyed, against nature.  In his own world he
   was a diligent, a glorious worker — he was not indolent — he only wrought
   out life according to his tendency, his constitutional fitness, and there
   he sinned.</p>
  <p>
   Yet, oh man of the world! you who are so ready to sneer at Coleridge, let the
   comparison between him and yourself be put upon fair grounds before we join
   you in denunciation of the sin.  The way in which you state the comparison
   is this:  “Here am I, fighting the world in its roughest forms for a
   livelihood; there was Coleridge, who would not
   brace his muscles and fight like me.”  In another way let us state the 
   case.  Suppose yourself and Coleridge translated to
   that spiritual world where there are no actualities of the precise kind
   which you cope with.  Grant that you each retained the same natural
   constitution as on earth, with how much ease or willingness would you
   change your element and labor in his province?  It would then be his right
   to be called the actor; you would be the dreamer, and your dreams would be
   of things which as little suited his every-day activity as in this world
   his suited your own.  You would be called with stentorian voices to awake
   to the reality of things — to dismiss the visionary figments of commerce,
   manufactures, credit, and capital, and to strive boldly in the arena of
   thought and art, and other spiritual excellences.</p>
  <p>
   Do you say, “But every man’s business is with the world in which he is
   placed for the time being?”  I acknowledge that; but it is a misfortune, an
   imperfection of the present state.  The greatest harmony is that wherein
   every mind works out most fully its own office.  Still, the higher
   obligation, the moral, called Coleridge to an
   uncongenial activity, and in not going he was wrong.  Remember in an
   analogous case what you would do; think what a hard thing is the change of
   element, and then denounce if you can.</p>
  <p>
   Interpreting the opium passage of Coleridge’s life by
   marginal references from all the pages previous, we shall see him more
   justly, and therefore more gently than by any light thrown upon it as an
   isolated paragraph, from severe commentaries framed according to a personal
   and unappreciative standard.</p>
  <p>
   We shall see him first as the boy.  The child, as the cut-and-dried
   biographies have it, of poor but highly respectable parentage, that very
   strict economy which is so erroneously supposed to educate families into
   practical habits, cultivated his ideal tendency until it became exquisite.
   The necessity of a careful use of means in a household is the last of all
   things to rear its children practically.  Extreme poverty, no doubt, from
   stimulating the very primitive activities of existence, may make a progeny
   which is intellectually too active to remain in the condition into which it
   was born, sharp-witted, cautious, provident, business-like in every
   respect.  This fact is frequently to be observed in poor families, where 
   sloth and viciousness do not prevent its occurrence.  But the man with
   moderate means, who in his household affairs must be continually regulating
   expenditure, has reason to believe that his children, especially the more
   mentally active of them, will grow up, unless great care is taken, into
   very unpractical views.  The reasoning is something like this:</p>
  <p>
   From earliest consciousness they will be thrown upon their own resources
   for enjoyment.  The expensive toy, the luxurious recreation, will be
   entirely out of their reach.  Yet, as the outwelling child-life must have
   some outlet, they will not be without toys, without recreation of one kind
   or another, and they will invent them for themselves.  Out of the
   imagination they will fashion for themselves a domain where the simplest
   things have some rich meaning, glorified by an ideal excellence, and where
   all the most extravagant wishes are realized.  In their plays they will be
   kings and queens of a garden-spot, transact weighty diplomatic business on
   the backs of old letters, and make boundless purchases of territory with 
   pebbles or shells.  In this cheap kingdom they will live as all-absorbing a
   life as the dignitaries whom they counterfeit live in theirs; and, still
   more, they will contract a bias very difficult to alter as increased years 
   make it necessary.  The boy who suddenly awakes to find himself a man finds
   it hard to believe that his old ideal efforts and ideal pleasures can not,
   by an elevation of their plane, be made sufficient for the satisfaction of
   a life-time.</p>
  <p>
   More particularly is this true when, as in the present age, the world of
   books offers an additional asylum to the active child, to which, unless,
   both in mind and money, he is very poor indeed, he may retreat for the
   enjoyment which an outer world does not supply.  He is thus reared in an
   ideal atmosphere until it becomes the nutriment of his very being.</p>
  <p>
   From such a state as this, and through his rough experience of human
   mercies at the hands of
   <a href="Notes/n69274.html" target="bottom">Dr. Bowyer</a>,
   of Christ’s Hospital, we may follow Coleridge on till we find
   him at Cambridge.  How little he was fitted by nature to cope with the
   stern substantialities of an English University course is to be read in his
   final abandonment of its honors under the pressure of pecuniary
   difficulties, and the despair of an impossible attachment, and his
   enlistment into
   <a href="Notes/n92486.html" target="bottom">the Dragoons</a>
   as a desperate indication of a desperate state 
   of mind.  Then succeed the Pantisocracy, marriage without the means of a
   livelihood, editorship without patrons, and without a single natural
   qualification for the office except the proverbially unremunerative one of
   out-speaking sincerity; literary labors of all kinds, from the volume of
   poems to the political leader, travels upon a pension, communion with
   German mind in books and men, of all ideal things the most ideal.</p>
  <p>
   At length, by these steps, with here and there a repetition, we reach the
   period when his opium life commenced.  In all fairness, what sort of a
   training had his whole previous existence been for a calm looking at the
   dangers of the fascinating indulgence, for a rejection of its
   temptation?</p>
  <p>
   I dare to affirm that there is many a man who, when jaded by the day’s
   labor, throws himself down to be refreshed by music, who in such an
   indulgence is committing no greater sin of intention than
   Coleridge committed when,
   coming weary from a life-time, he abandoned himself to the enjoyment of
   that dangerous beauty which absolute necessities and spent vitality forbade
   him to look for in the external world.  You and I, my reader, should we
   abandon ourselves to the opium indulgence,
   <a href="Notes/n75492.html" target="bottom">would know fully the wrong we were committing</a>;
   Coleridge had not any definite idea.  Bitterly did he repent it afterward;
   but his sorrow arose rather out of the terrible results of his course than
   from any self-recrimination, even in his sensitive mind, of malice
   aforethought.</p>
  <p>
   But whether, in the case of any opium-eater, the habit be or be not
   contracted with a full knowledge of its evil, there is but one view which
   we can take of the fruitlessness of struggles made for disenthrallment at a
   later period of his career.  That fruitlessness is not to be treated with
   contempt as evidence of a cowardly lack of self-denial which prevents the
   man from breaking the meshes of a bondage grown delightful to him.  We are
   called rather to look upon the agonies of one who, in a nightmare-dream of 
   fearful precipices, has not the power of volition to draw himself from the
   edge;
   <a href="Notes/n17460.html" target="bottom">we must pity — deeply pity</a>.
   The protracted use of opium, not by any metaphor, but in a sense as
   rigorous as that of paralysis, utterly annihilates the power of will over
   action.</p>
  <p>
   It is no mere cloak of apology which I would throw over those unfortunates
   who, after ineffectual attempts at being free, have subsided again into
   indulgence; it is actual fact that, in the horrors and the debility
   resulting from the disuse of the narcotic, its sufferers are no more
   responsible for their acts than the insane.  When every man is a
   <a href="Notes/n34038.html" target="bottom">Scævola</a>,
   and can hold his hand in the flames till it is consumed,
   then may we expect men to endure the unrelieved tortures of
   opium-abandonment to their end in enfranchisement.  Who of us would hold
   himself responsible for withdrawing his hand from the fire?  I fancy the
   best of our martyrs, willing as they were to die for their cause, would
   have leaped out if they had not been chained among the fagots.</p>
  <p>
   So far from extenuating the wrong of narcotics and stimulants, I believe
   myself only proclaiming (and I would it were with a thousand tongues) the
   perils into which they lead, as the most striking exponent of that wrong.
   This very emasculation of the will itself, while it may not produce the
   sensation of a detail of horrible visions, is in reality the most terrible
   characteristic of the injury wrought by these agents.  A spiritual unsexing
   as it is, it vitiates all relations of life which exist to its victim; by
   submitting to it he sows a harvest of degradation, which involves in its
   mildewed sheaves manly fortitude, hopefulness, faith of promises, all the
   list of high-toned principles which are the virile — yes, still more
   broadly — the human glory.</p>
  <p>
   To this truth let a spirit so essentially noble as Coleridge witness,
   agonized by the shame of those subterfuges which were necessary sometimes
   to procure the indulgence that had become to him the very nutriment of his
   being.</p>
  <p>
   It is vain for us to shut our eyes to the fact that opium-eating in all
   countries is an immense and growing evil.  In America peculiarly it is so,
   from the constitution of our national mind.  An intense devotion to worldly
   business in our representative man often coexists with a stifled craving
   for something higher.  Beginning, for the sake of advancement, at an age
   when other nations are still in the playground or the schoolroom, he
   continues rising early and lying down late in the pursuit of his ambition
   to a period when they have retired to the ease of travel or a villa.  Yet
   from the very fact that his fathers have done this before him, he inherits
   a constitution least of all fitted to bear those drafts upon it.</p>
  <p>
   The question of his breaking down is only one of time.  Sometimes it
   happens very early; and then not only does an exhausted vitality require to
   be replenished, but the long-pent-up craving for a beauty of which business
   activity has said, “It is not in me,” rises from its bonds, and, with a sad
   imperativeness, asks satisfaction.</p>
  <p>
   How hard is it now to unlearn that habit of hasty execution which had been
   the acquirement of his whole previous life!  The demands of business had
   always met from him with rapid dispatch; this complex craving must be
   answered as rapidly.  The self-denial of recreation, abandonment of care,
   well-regulated regimen, might gradually restore to him health, and, with
   it, the elastic capacity for receiving happiness.  He can not wait; the
   process is too slow.  And the only immediate infusion of energy must be the
   artificial; the devil stands at his ear, and suggests opium.  From that
   moment begins the sad, old, inevitable tale of the opium-eater’s life.</p>
  <p>
   Alas! it is no rare one with us.  The inhabitant of the smallest village
   need hardly go out of his own street to hear it, and the unknown wretched
   who hide their shame, first in sad family hearts, last in the unwhispering
   grave, are even more in number, doubtless, than the known.</p>
  <p>
   The only effort which can be made by a man of good feeling to his race is
   to suggest some means of escape to those who feel their bondage.  For the
   terror of beginners, enough both of precept and example has been diffused
   widely at the present day, if that would do any good.  I would not be
   satisfying my convictions of right did I not add to any denunciation of the
   habit some index toward freedom; for I believe there are many men, perhaps
   some who will read these words, who would escape from the opium slavery at
   any expense of effort, provided that the lethal stupor of their energies
   could be removed.  Where there is one man who, like
   <a href="Notes/n34425.html" target="bottom">De Quincey</a>,
   can at last get free by his own unaided struggle, there are a thousand to
   whom help from without is an absolute necessity.</p>
  <p>
   It was my happiness, very soon after breaking away from the hasheesh
   thraldom, to make the acquaintance of a gentleman whose experience of
   narcotics from eye-witness in their particular mother-countries, added to
   the capabilities which he possessed, as a medical man, for philosophizing
   upon such experience, interested me much in speaking with him.  It had been
   his good fortune to meet with some singularly inordinate opium-eaters, who
   were in utter despair of recovery, and, still better, it was his blessing
   to effect a permanent and radical cure.  In one case with which I became
   acquainted, the patient had reached a higher point of daily indulgence than
   De Quincey at his most
   desperate stage, and had seemingly lost all constitutional basis for
   restoration to work upon.  Yet the restoration was effected.  I owe it not
   less to a proper good-will to humanity than to gratitude on the part of men
   to say who this physician was.  Sincerely desirous of being in some way
   instrumental in the cure of a bondage which, if not my own, was, at least,
   so near akin to it that I can deeply sympathize with its oppressed, I give
   a name whose betrayal in these pages violates no secrecy to the public,
   while it may do a great good —
   <a href="Notes/n40264.html" target="bottom">Dr. J. W. Palmer</a>,
   of Roslyn, Long Island, the author-surgeon, late of the Honorable East
   India Company’s Service, and of
   <a href="Notes/n31605.html" target="bottom">“The Golden Dagon,”</a>
   to which I have referred.
   <a href="Notes/aNoteB.html" target="bottom">*</a></p>
<!--se:split-->
  <h2>Appendix.</h2>
  <hr width="50" align="left" />
  <h3><i><a name="notea">Note A</a></i></h3>
  <p>
   The work referred to is a monograph upon
   <a href="Notes/n24709.html" target="bottom">Trance and human Hybernation</a>,
   by <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr> James Braid, of Edinburgh, and published
   by John Church, Princes Street, Soho, London.  Besides the copy now in my
   hands, through the kindness of my friend <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr>
   Rosa, of Watertown, I have never seen any other, although it probably
   exists in medical libraries in this country.  Aware, at any rate, that the
   book is inaccessible, except by considerable painstaking, to general
   readers, I will state the authority upon which the phenomenon of the
   fakeer’s interment and trance is related, in order that it may rest upon a
   stronger basis of proof than the testimony of an exceedingly credulous and
   superstitious people like the natives of Lahore.</p>
  <p>
   Sir Claude Wade, formerly of her majesty’s service, and, at the date of
   <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr> Braid’s writing, residing in Ryde, on the
   Isle of Wight, assures the doctor by letter that he was present at Lahore
   during the period of the fakeer’s inhumation, and witnessed his
   disinterment.  By this gentleman, Sir C. E. Tervelyan, and Captain Osborne,
   all that is stated of the fakeer by <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr> Braid
   is authenticated, and, indeed, through them did the doctor obtain the
   materials for his narrative.</p>
  <p>
   By as strong a conjunction of testimony, therefore, as could be desired for
   the proof of the most startling assertion, is this recital put beyond the
   possibility of being an imposture.</p>
  <hr width="50" align="left">
  <h3><i><a name="noteb">Note B</a></i></h3>
  <p>
   Among a number of articles written at various times by this author upon the
   subject of the narcotic fascinations, is one, published some time ago over
   his own signature in the New York Tribune, relative to the employment of
   hasheesh in India both as a gratification and a remedy.  My knowledge of 
   his thorough acquaintance with the habits of the ultra Oriental people,
   among whom he so long dwelt, together with a number of astonishing cures of
   the opium bane which he effected when, as I have said, all hope of
   restoration seemed forever gone, makes me particularly desirous to give the
   article of which I speak in full, as supplementary, through its specific
   value, to that which I have written of my own experience of hasheesh.
   Except as an antispasmodic in a very limited number of diseases, the
   Cannabis is known and prized very little among our practitioners, and I am
   persuaded that its uses are far wider and more important than has yet been
   imagined.</p>
  <p>
   Urged by this conviction, I have therefore transcribed the article of
   <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr> Palmer, and offer it here to the thoughtful
   attention which it deserves from all, whether professional or lay, who wish
   to add a most beneficial agent to their pharmacopœia.  It is
   entitled</p>
   <blockquote>
    <h3>
     HASHEESH IN HYDROPHOBIA.
    </h3>
    <i>To the Editor of the New York Tribune:</i>
    <p>
     Sir, — In your journal of Friday last appeared a timely paper on
     hydrophobia, from <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr> Griscom, of the New
     York Hospital, being a report of the interesting case of Edward
     Bransfield, with the inevitably fatal termination.  Allow me to add to
     the communication of <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr> Griscom another on
     the same subject, which may be deemed important.  It is the result of
     medical observation in the East on the use and effects of hasheesh
     (<i>Cannabis Indica</i>).  In thus writing for the public I shall avoid
     technicalities.</p>
    <p>
     The Radda and Coolee bazars of the
     <a href="Notes/n32670.html" target="bottom">Black Town of Calcutta</a>
     are the <a href="Notes/n34331.html" target="bottom">Borroboola-Ghas</a>
     of heathendom — the back slums of Budhism — where the most abject of
     <a href="Notes/n01680.html" target="bottom">helots</a> and a very
     <a href="Notes/n22575.html" target="bottom">Herod</a> among cruel heathen
     are presented in the same person — whither the flannel shirts and
     small-tooth combs of the
     <a href="Notes/n70306.html" target="bottom"><abbr title="Reverend">Rev.</abbr>
     Aminadab Sleek are sent every Friday night from Burton’s Theatre</a>, but
     never reach.  It is there you must go to procure your hasheesh fresh from
     the fields, and see your living subject try experiments on himself.  If
     you have a lively case of Rabies in your compound, and carry a copy of
     <a href="Notes/n59001.html" target="bottom">Monte Christo</a><a href="#foot1" name="kick1"><small><sup>*</sup></small></a>
     in your pocket, so much the better — you are posted in the phenomena.
     You will find dirty, dreadful-looking shops, redolent of petroleum and the
     hubble-bubble,<a href="#foot2" name="kick2"><small><sup>†</sup></small></a>
     and prolific in <a href="Notes/n98946.html" target="bottom">Pariah
     dogs</a>, ochre-colored urchins (which, as they flounder about on their
     bellies, always a shade or two lighter than the rest, oddly resemble
     young crocodiles), and every other living thing which should make those
     small-tooth combs lively in the market.  And, amid these essentially
     Oriental surroundings, you will find a fat old gentleman, with the least
     possible clothing, to compromise between decency and the climate, who is
     either galvanic like <a href="Notes/n68838.html" target="bottom">Uriah
     Heep</a>, or asleep like <a href="Notes/n85628.html" target="bottom">the
     Fat Boy</a>, as you happen to catch him just before or after his pipe,
     and who is licensed to dispense to the denizens of that quarter
     <a href="Notes/n90535.html" target="bottom">churrus, gunjah, and bhang</a>,
     in the name of <a href="Notes/n71561.html" target="bottom">Lord
     Dalhousie</a>, the most noble the Governor General in Council.</p>
    <p>
     At the season of flowering, a resinous substance exudes and concretes on
     the slender stalks, leaves, and tops of the hemp plant in India, a sticky
     gum which causes the young stems to adhere together tenaciously in the
     bundles of gunjah.  Men, now dressed all in leather, are sent into the
     fields to run to and fro, sweeping the plants with their garments, from
     which afterward they diligently gather the resin that has adhered.  This
     is the churrus, wherein is all the narcotic virtue of the herb, all the
     seventh heaven of hasheesh intoxication for the Hindoo and the Arab.  The
     most potent of it comes from Nepaul.  Bhang, or subjee, is the larger
     leaves and capsules of the Cannabis compressed in balls and sticky
     layers, with here and there some flowers between.  Infused with water, it
     forms an intoxicating brew, to which, however, the Hindoos are not
     commonly addicted.  Gunjah, mixed with tobacco and smoked in a pipe, is
     the shape of the drug which they popularly affect, and it is as gunjah
     that it is commonly sold in the shops.  This comes in bundles,
     twenty-four of the plants entire, stalks, leaves, capsules, and tops
     undisturbed, and from which their resin has not been separated, adhering
     tenaciously.  Gunjah, indeed, is the term proper to Hindostan, hasheesh
     being Arabic, and used to denote the tops and tenderest parts of the
     plant, sun-dried and powdered.</p>
    <p>
     Romantic extravagances have been written and told about the magic and the
     marvels of hasheesh, and Indian
     <a href="Notes/n66469.html" target="bottom">Coleridges</a>
     and
     <a href="Notes/n34425.html" target="bottom">De Quinceys</a>
     have been pressed into service to furnish forth characteristic stories
     for Oriental annuals and spectacles of the Monte Christo kind.  These are
     for the most part fictitious, though, to be sure, your
     <a href="Notes/n00657.html" target="bottom">kidmudgar</a>,
     if he happens to be a
     <a href="Notes/n08263.html" target="bottom">gunjah-wallah</a>,
     is apt at times to indulge in splendid fancies, to make you a
     <a href="Notes/n02774.html" target="bottom">grand salaam</a>
     instead of a sandwich, and offer you a
     <a href="Notes/n31875.html" target="bottom">houri</a>
     when you merely demanded a red herring.  But
     <a href="Notes/n65786.html" target="bottom"><abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr> O’Shaugnessy</a>,
     the present distinguished superintendent of the Indian telegraph, who
     formerly administered a model system of discipline among the native
     hospitals, and from his Eastern look-out has added here and there a new
     light to the firmament of science, who was the first to pursue this
     subject with well-directed researches, and procure from it definite
     results, describes the uniform effect of this agent on the human economy
     as consisting in a prompt and complete alleviation of pain; a singular
     power of controlling inordinate muscular spasms, especially in
     hydrophobia and traumatic tetanus; “as a soporific or hypnotic in
     conciliating sleep;” inordinate augmentation of appetite; the decided
     promotion of aphrodisiac desire; and sudden cerebral exaltation, with
     perfect mental cheerfulness, is in no case followed by the painful
     nervous “unstringing,” the constipation and suppression of secretions
     which attend the use of opium.</p>
    <p>
     Having daily under his eyes, in the streets of Calcutta, examples of this
     marvelous power of the gunjah, <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr>
     O’Shaughnessy proceeded, in a
     succession of judicious experiments, to apply it in several diseases
     attended with much muscular convulsion.  Its action he discovered to be
     primarily on the motor nerves, promptly inducing complete loss of power
     in almost all the muscles; hence its timeliness in the spasms of tetanus,
     in the cramp of Asiatic cholera, in the sharp constriction of the muscles
     of <a href="Notes/n75807.html" target="bottom">deglutition</a>
     in hydrophobia.  In tetanus especially he met with signal
     success, even in his earliest experiments perfectly restoring ten cases
     in fourteen, and since then, to my personal knowledge, a still larger
     proportion.  In the summer of 1852 it was administered with convincing
     success in cases of Asiatic cholera among the Company’s troops in Burmah,
     even in the collapsed stage, subduing cramp and restoring warmth to the 
     surface.  Under its influence alone, that peculiar blueness and
     shriveling of the nails and fingers, familiarly known as “washerwoman’s
     hands,” has been rapidly dispersed, the flesh plumping out rosily again,
     like a decayed apple under an air-pump.</p>
    <p>
     Every intelligent physician will perceive that there is nothing in the
     kind of virtue manifested in these cases which has not a direct bearing,
     and by the same <span lang="la">modus operandi</span>, on the phenomena
     of hydrophobia, since it has been ably contended, especially in India,
     that the three diseases are of a kindred type; that their phenomena are
     purely nervous and functional, and that no local inflammations are
     necessary to their definition.</p>
    <p>
     In an occasional contribution to the British and Foreign Medical Review,
     and in some excellent monographs published in Calcutta,
     <abbr title="Doctor">Dr.</abbr> O’Shaughnessy
     has given the results of his experiments since 1850, by which it appears
     that in almost every case, with the Cannabis alone, he has succeeded in
     procuring perfect alleviation of pain, complete control of the spasm, and
     its attendant apprehension and infernal imagination — indeed, an utter
     routing of all the horrors of the disease; and claiming, with a saving
     clause, one or two cures, he makes it evident that in every instance a
     painless, tranquil, conscious termination is attainable.  His patients
     have swallowed water with avidity, paddled in it and made merry with it,
     and been friendly with it to the end.</p>
    <p>
     That it has thus overcome the horrors of Rabies and all the dreadfulness
     of such a death-bed, should procure for the Cannabis more consideration
     than it has met with at the hands of the profession in this country.  The
     objection, hitherto valid, that its preparations are of unequal strength,
     and that the drug loses all its virtues by change of climate, is
     conclusively met and defeated at last by the admirable alcoholic extract
     of <abbr title="Mister">Mr.</abbr> Robinson.  The writer of this has seen
     a sepoy of the 40th Rifles,
     an hour before furiously hydrophobic, under the influence of the Cannabis
     not only drinking water freely, but pleasantly washing his face and
     hands.</p>
    <p>
     In conclusion, I would invoke for the Cannabis Indica the interest of
     American writers and practitioners by research and experiment.</p>
    <p>
     *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *</p>
    <p align="right">
     J. W. Palmer, <abbr lang="la" title="Medicinae Doctor">M.D.</abbr></p>
    <br />
    <center>THE END.</center>
  <hr />
  <ul>
   <li><a href="#kick1" name="foot1"><small><sup>*</sup></small></a> For the
    benefit of those who have not read this novel of Dumas, let me say that in
    it quite a lively hasheesh vision is recorded.</li>
   <li><a href="#kick2" name="foot2"><small><sup>†</sup></small></a>
    Indice for water-pipe.</li>
  </ul>
  </blockquote>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Preface</h2>
<p>
 I like prefaces as little as my readers can.  If this so proverbially
 unnoticed part of the book catch any eye, the glance that it gives will of
 course travel no farther to find my apology for making this preface a short
 one.  There is but one thought for which I wish to find place here.  I am
 deeply aware that, if the succeeding pages are read at all, it will be by
 those who have already learned to love
 <a href="Notes/n34425.html" target="bottom">De Quincey</a>.
 Not that I dare for a moment to compare the manner of my narrative with that
 most wondrous, most inspired Dreamer's; but in the experience of his life and
 my own there is a single common characteristic which happens to be the very
 one for whose sake men open any such book.  The path of De Quincey
 led beyond all the boundaries of the ordinary life into a world of intense
 lights and shadows — a realm in which all the range of average thought found
 its conditions surpassed, if not violated.  My own career, however far its
 recital may fall short of the Opium Eater's, and notwithstanding it was not
 coincident and but seldom parallel with his, still ran through lands as
 glorious, as unfrequented, as weird as his own, and takes those who would 
 follow it out of the trodden highways of mind.  In the most candid and
 indulgent reader who has come to my story from the perusal of the
 Confessions,
 I forsee that there will exist an inevitable tendency to compare the two, to
 seek resemblances, and perhaps, if such be found, to ascribe them to my at
 least unconscious imitation of the great, the elder author.  How much to my
 disparagement this would be, my natural desire for the success of this book
 makes unpleasant to represent even to myself.  
</p><p>
 If it be possible to forestall such a state of things, let me aim at it by a
 few brief representations of the manner in which this work has been written.  
</p><p>
 Frankly do I say that I admire De Quincey to
 such a degree that, were not imitation base and he inimitable, I know no
 master of style in whose footsteps I should more earnestly seek to tread;
 but, in the first place, as this book asserts, it is a resumé of
 experiences which, so far from being fiction, have received at my hands a
 delineation unsatisfactory to myself from its very inadequacy.  The fact of
 my speaking truths, so far as they can be <em>spoken</em>, out of my actual
 memory, must shield me, if the assertion be received by any but one who has
 tasted my cup of Awakening, from the imputation of being a copyist of
 incidents.  
</p><p>
 In the second place, to copy <em>style</em>, study, care, and frequent
 references to the proposed model are indispensable.  Very well; not one of
 the pages which make this book has ever been rewritten.  It has been printed
 from the first draft, and that, through necessities of other occupation,
 illness, and care, compelled to be thrown off, though on its author's part
 unwillingly,
 <a href="Notes/n87127.html" target="bottom">currente calamo</a>.
 Moreover, out of particular jealousy against the risk of burlesquing the
 inimitable, I have refrained from looking at the Confessions
 from the beginning to the end of my undertaking.
</p><p>
 My memory, however, tells me that occasionally there are actual resemblances
 both in incident and method.  As an incident-resemblance, I instance the
 perception, in both experiences, of the inerasible character of the mind's 
 memorial inscriptions — as De Quincey grandly has it — the
 <a href="Notes/n63778.html" target="bottom">Palimpsest</a>
 characteristic of memory.  Acknowledging the resemblance, I only say that we
 both saw the same thing.  The state of insight which he attained through
 opium, I reached by the way of hasheesh.  Almost through the very same
 symbols as De Quincey, a
 hasheesh-<a href="Notes/n79888.html" target="bottom">maenad</a>
 friend of mine also saw it, as this book relates, and the
 vision is accessible to all of the same temperament and degree of exaltation.
 For a place, New York for instance, a stranger accounts, not by saying that
 any one of the many who testify to its existence copied from one another, but
 by acknowledging “there is such a place.”  So do I account for the fact by
 saying “there is such a fact.”
</p><p>
 As a resemblance in method, by which I mean mechanical arrangement, I am
 aware only of this, <a href="Notes/n45240.html" target="bottom">viz.</a>,
 that I divide my narrative into use and abandonment
 of hasheesh, and speculations upon the phenomena after abandonment, which 
 latter, for the sake of anticipating the charge, I say might perhaps be
 compared as to its order with
 <a href="Notes/n20875.html" target="bottom">Suspiria</a>
 but the most perfect
 <a href="Notes/n14597.html" target="bottom">Zoilus</a>
 among hypercritics would be aware that in this arrangement I follow Nature,
 who begins, goes on, and finishes, and reflects the past in her progress, so
 that I should seem no copyist on that score.  
</p><p>
 But, at any rate, if influenced by the memory of the great Visionary's method
 in any sense (and it is true that I might have made my course more dissimilar
 by neglecting the order of time), I feel that the influence must necessarily
 have been beneficial to my own efforts.  
</p><p>
 As the bard who would sing of heroes follows the
 <a href="Notes/n59180.html" target="bottom">blind old harper of Ionia</a>
 along that immortal corridor of resounding song which first made Greece
 imperishable, and
 <a href="Notes/n57516.html" target="bottom">tells his battles in the Epic, not the Elegy,</a>
 so must every
 man hereafter, who opens the mysteries of that great soul within him, speak,
 so far as he can, down the channels through which Thomas de Quincey
 has spoken, nor out of vain perversity refuse to use a passage which the one
 grand pioneer has made free to all.  
</p><p>
 If in any way, therefore, except servilely, I seem to have followed De Quincey,
 I am proud of it.  If there be any man who does not feel the grace which the
 mantle of that true poet's influence confers upon every thinker and scholar
 who loves truth, beauty, and the music of the English tongue, I ask that he
 will transfer unto me his share thereof, and at once the Preface and the
 Prayer of
 </p><center>
 THE HASHEESH EATER<br />
 The Son of Pythagoras<br />
 are ended.<br />
 </center>
<!--se:split-->
<h2>Introduction</h2>
<p>
 <a name="quote26441" />The singular energy and scope of imagination which
 characterize all Oriental tales, and especially that great typical
 representative of the species,
 <a href="Notes/n28864.html" target="bottom">the Arabian Nights</a>,
 were my ceaseless marvel from earliest childhood.  The book of Arabian and
 Turkish story has very few thoughtful readers among the nations of the West,
 who can rest contented with admiring its bold flights into unknown regions of
 imagery, and close the mystic pages that have enchanted them without an
 inquiry as to the influences which have turned the human mind into such rare
 channels of thought.  Sooner or later comes the question of the producing
 causes, and it is in the power of few — very few of us — to answer that
 question aright.
</p><p>
 We try to imitate Eastern narrative, but in vain.  Our minds can find no
 <a href="Notes/n97403.html" target="bottom">clew</a>
 to its strange, untrodden by-ways of speculation; our highest soarings are
 still in an atmosphere which feels heavy with the reek and damp of ordinary
 life.  We fail to account for those storm-wrapped peaks of sublimity which
 hover over the path of Oriental story, or those beauties which, like rivers
 of Paradise, make music beside it.  We are all of us taught to say, “The
 children of the East live under a sunnier sky than their Western brethren:
 they are the repositors of centuries of tradition; their semi-civilized
 imagination is unbound by the fetters of logic and the schools.”  But the
 Ionians once answered all these conditions, yet Homer sang no
 <a href="Notes/n55983.html" target="bottom">Eblis</a>,
 no superhuman journey on the wings of genii through infinitudes of rosy
 ether.  At one period of their history, France, Germany and England abounded
 in all the characteristics of the untutored Old-world mind, yet when did an
 echo of Oriental music ring from the lute of minstrel,
 <a href="Notes/n12864.html" target="bottom">minnesinger</a>,
 or
 <a href="Notes/n18516.html" target="bottom">trouvère</a>?
 The difference can not be accounted for by climate, religion, or manners.  It 
 is not the supernatural in Arabian story which is inexplicable, but the
 peculiar phase of the supernatural both in beauty and terror.  
</p><p>
 I say inexplicable, because to me, in common with all around me, it bore this
 character for years.  In later days, I believe, and now with all due modesty
 assert, I unlocked the secret, not by a hypothesis, not by processes of
 reasoning, but by journeying through those self-same fields of weird
 experience which are
 <a href="Notes/n64077.html" target="bottom">dinted</a>
 by the sandals of the glorious old dreamers of the East.  Standing on the
 same mounts of vision where they stood, listening to the same gurgling 
 melody that broke from their enchanted fountains, yes, plunging into their
 rayless caverns of sorcery, and imprisoned with their genie in the
 unutterable silence of the fathomless sea, have I dearly bought the right to
 come to men with the chart of my wanderings in my hands, and unfold to them
 the foundations of the fabric of Oriental story.  
</p><p>
 The secret lies in the use of hasheesh.  A very few words will suffice to
 tell what hasheesh is.  In northern latitudes the hemp plant (Cannabis
 Sativa) grows almost entirely to fibre, becoming, in virtue of this quality,
 the great resource for mats and cordage.  Under a southern sun this same
 plant loses its fibrous texture, but secretes, in quantities equal to one
 third of its bulk, an opaque and greenish resin.  Between the northern and
 the southern hemp there is no difference, except the effect of diversity of 
 climate upon the same vegetable essence; yet naturalists, misled by the much
 greater extent of gummy secretion in the latter, have distinguished it from
 its brother of the colder soil by the name Cannabis Indica.  The resin of the
 Cannabis Indica is hasheesh.  From time immemorial it has been known among
 all the nations of the East as possessing powerful stimulant and narcotic
 properties; throughout Turkey, Persia, Nepaul, and India it is used at this
 day among all classes of society as an habitual indulgence.  The forms in
 which it is employed are various.  Sometimes it appears in the state in which
 it exudes from the mature stalk, as a crude resin; sometimes it is
 manufactured into a conserve with clarified butter, honey, and spices;
 sometimes a decoction is made of the flowering tops in water or
 <a href="Notes/n90389.html" target="bottom">arrack</a>.
 Under either of these forms the method of administration is by swallowing.
 Again, the dried plant is smoked in pipes or chewed, as tobacco among
 ourselves.  
</p><p> 
 Used in whatever preparation, hasheesh is characterized by the most
 remarkable phenomena, both physical and spiritual.  A series of experiments
 made with it by men of eminent attainments in the medical profession,
 principally at Calcutta, and during the last ten years, prove it to be
 capable of inducing all the ordinary symptoms of catalepsy,
 or even of trance.  
</p><p>
 However, from the fact of its so extensive daily use as a pleasurable
 stimulus in the countries where experiments with it have been made, it has
 doubtless lost interest in the field of scientific research, and has come to
 be regarded as only one more means among the multitude which mankind in all 
 latitudes are seeking for the production of a sensual intoxication.  Now and
 then a traveler, passing by the bazar where it was exposed for sale, moved by
 curiosity, has bought some form of the hemp, and made the trial of its
 effects upon himself; but the results of the experiment were dignified with
 no further notice than a page or a chapter in the note-book of his
 journeyings, and the hasheesh phenomena, with an exclamation of wonder, were
 thenceforward dismissed from his own and the public mind.  Very few even of
 the permanently domesticated foreign residents in the countries of the East
 have ever adopted this indulgence as a habit, and of those few I am not aware
 of any who have communicated their experience to the world, or treated it as 
 a subject possessing scientific interest.  
</p><p>
 My own personal acquaintance with this drug, covering as it did a
 considerable extent of time, and almost every possible variety of phenomena,
 both physical and psychological, proper to its operation, not only empowers,
 but for a long time has been impelling me to give it a publicity which may 
 bring it in contact with a larger number of minds interested in such
 researches than it could otherwise hope to meet.  As a key to some of the
 most singular manifestations of the Oriental mind, as a narrative interesting
 to the attentive student of the human soul and body, and the mysterious
 network of interacting influences which connect them, I therefore venture to
 present this experience to the investigation of general readers, accompanying
 it with the sincere disavowal of all fiction in my story, and the assurance
 that whatever traits of the marvelous may appear in its gradual development
 are inherent in the truth as I shall simply delineate it.  I am aware that,
 without this disavowal, much — nay, even most that I shall say, will be
 taken <a href="Notes/n04123.html" target="bottom"><span lang="la">“cum grano salis.”</span></a>
 I desire it, therefore, to be distinctly understood at the outset that my
 <a name="quote29452">narrative is one of unexaggerated fact, its occurrences
 being recorded
 precisely as they impressed themselves upon me, without one additional stroke
 of the pencil of an after-fancy thrown in to heighten the tone or harmonize
 the effect.</a>  Whatever of the wonderful may appear in these pages belongs to
 the subject and not to the manner.  
</p><p>
 The progress of my narration will be in the order of time.  I shall begin
 with my first experiment of the use of hasheesh, an experiment made simply
 from the promptings of curiosity; it will then be my endeavor to detail the
 gradual change of my motive for its employment from the desire of research to
 the fascinated longing for its weird and immeasurable ecstasy; I shall relate
 how that ecstasy by degrees became daily more and more flecked with shadows
 of immeasurable pain, but still, in this dual existence, assumed a character
 increasingly apocalyptic of utterly unpreconceived provinces of mental
 action.  In the next succeeding stage of my experience, torture, save at rare 
 intervals, will have swallowed up happiness altogether, without abating in
 the least the fascination of the habit.  In the next and final one will be
 beheld my instantaneous abandonment of the indulgence, the cause which led to
 it, and the discipline of suffering which attended the self-denial.  
</p><p>
 The aim of this relation is not merely æsthetic nor scientific: though
 throughout it there be no stopping to moralize, it is my earnest desire that
 it may teem with suggestions of a lesson without which humanity can learn 
 nothing in the schools.  It is this: the soul withers and sinks from its
 growth toward the true end of its being beneath the dominance of any sensual
 indulgence.  The chain of its bondage may for a long time continue to be
 golden — many a day may pass before the fetters gall — yet all the while
 there is going on a slow and insidious consumption of its native strength,
 and when at last captivity becomes a pain, it may awake to discover in
 inconceivable terror that the very forces of disenthralment have perished out
 of its reach.
</p>
